 
The Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter Couples 
Hippocampal Burst Firing with Homeostatic Plasticity 
 
1 Introduction 
Mitochondria participate in diverse physiological processes through their handling of 
intracellular Ca2+ [1-3]. The primary route of mitochondrial Ca²⁺ (mitoCa2+) influx is the 
mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) [4, 5]. MCU is indispensable for mitoCa2+ influx 
under evoked, high stimulation conditions [4-26]. Importantly, there are no compensatory 
alternatives for evoked mitoCa2+ uptake, which is equally impaired by acute and chronic 
perturbations to MCU. Notwithstanding, MCU is highly conserved across all animals [27, 28], 
while MCU homologs have been identified in nearly all plants and metazoa [17, 29, 30]. Given 
its singular function and ubiquitous expression, one of the most surprising findings of the 
molecular era [17] is that MCU knockout (MCU-KO) typically results in remarkably mild 
phenotypes. Most organisms or tissues lacking MCU exhibit no gross pathology or dysfunction 
[9, 15, 23, 31-33], which poses an ‘evolutionary paradox’ [17] – Why is MCU deeply 
conserved if its absence is well-tolerated?  
A potential answer emerges when perturbing MCU and subsequently challenging the 
system beyond its resting state. Under these circumstances, the functional impairments that 
occur collectively suggest a fundamental role of MCU in adaptation; enabling cells, tissues, 
and organisms to effectively cope with various forms of physiological stress [9, 15, 18, 29, 31-
36]. MCU-KO in Caenorhabditis elegans leads to impaired epidermal wound healing [31], in 
zebrafish to greater incidence of sinoatrial arrest [33], in Drosophila to shortened lifespan [15], 
in Arabidopsis thaliana to reduced root length under low-nutrient conditions [29], and in mice 
to a diminished capacity for sustained physical exercise [9, 32]. This pattern is further solidified 
through murine cell-type conditional MCU-KO, which in the heart leads to blunted cardiac 
output in response to adrenergic stimulation [34], in skeletal muscle to diminished sprint 
performance [35], in pancreatic beta-cells to impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion 
[18], in the liver to exacerbated steatosis under high-fat diet conditions [36] and in the brain to 
impairments in short- and long-term synaptic plasticity [6, 7, 13, 19, 22, 24, 26, 37-42].  
The brain has adaptive needs beyond synaptic plasticity. To balance the continuous 
barrage of stimuli and plastic events without succumbing to hyper- or hypo-activity, neuronal 
networks rely heavily on homeostatic regulation [43]. Homeostasis refers to the processes that 
stabilize key physiological variables within a healthy and functional range [44]. Firing rates 
are homeostatically regulated [45-50], and the clinical importance of firing rate homeostasis 
(FRH) is increasingly evident [48, 51-53]. Still, the molecular sensors that track deviations in 
firing remain elusive. One possible candidate is MCU [49, 54]. Due to its activation kinetics, 
MCU preferentially responds to high-frequency burst firing [40, 49, 55-57]. Neuronal bursts 
are a privileged mode of communication, essential for reliable synaptic transmission, the 
induction of synaptic plasticity, and the encoding of memories [58]. The selectivity of MCU 
for burst firing and its position within the interconnected mitochondrial network allows 
mitoCa2+ influx to integrate salient activity across time and space, offering a robust 
representation of recent cellular history. 
To test the functional relationships between MCU, burst-firing, and FRH, we performed 
a multi-level investigation of conditional MCU-KO in the mouse hippocampus, including long-
term electrophysiological recordings alongside continuous pharmacological perturbations. 
Ultimately, we offer a new perspective on the evolutionary paradox of MCU by establishing 
its role in converting high-intensity signals into long-lasting adaptive responses, in particular 
homeostatic plasticity.  
 
 
2 
Results 
We generated mice with targeted deletion of MCU in excitatory CA1 neurons and 
confirmed reduced MCU mRNA expression (Figure1A,B). As expected, Ca2+ imaging in 
cultured hippocampal neurons revealed a deficit in mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake of MCU-KO 
neurons, evoked by high frequency trains of action potentials (Figure 1C). Evoked cytosolic 
Ca2+ transients remained indistinguishable from control (Figure 1D). We then shifted our focus 
to calcium dynamics during spontaneous neuronal activity (Figure 1E,I). Surprisingly, the 
Ca2+ transients of MCU-KO neurons were fully preserved in the mitochondrial compartment 
(Figure 1F-H), yet larger and more frequent in the cytosolic compartment (Figure 1J-L). Thus, 
while MCU is strictly required for rapid calcium uptake during intense stimulation, it can be 
compensated for during resting states by alternative, possibly slower pathways [17, 59-62]. The 
compensation, however, involves enhanced cytosolic drive.  
To determine if the compensatory cytosolic drive in MCU-KO stems from a 
reconfiguration of baseline firing, we performed MEA recordings in cultured hippocampal 
neurons. While overall firing rates remained indistinguishable from controls, MCU-KO 
neurons exhibited significantly higher burstiness, defined as the probability of spikes occurring 
within bursts (Figure 2A). The same functional reorganization was observed in vivo. 
Extracellular tetrode recordings of regular spiking, putative pyramidal cells in CA1 of freely 
moving mice (Supp. Figure 1) revealed a shift from tonic towards phasic firing in MCU-KO 
neurons, with preservation of overall firing rates (Figure 2B).  
Given burst firing of pyramidal cells is strongly associated with sharp-wave ripples 
(SWRs; [63]), we hypothesized that the elevated intrinsic burstiness of MCU-KO neurons 
would distort these network oscillations. Indeed, SWR in MCU-KO mice had an increased 
peak amplitude (Figure 2C), possessed a faster internal frequency (Figure 2D), and were 
significantly shorter in duration (Figure 2E). Furthermore, per-unit analysis of firing during 
SWRs revealed advanced timing of spikes in MCU-KO neurons; their spike center of mass 
relative to the SWR peak shifted towards earlier, negative time lags compared to control 
(Figure 2F,G). To determine whether this advanced recruitment is directly linked to the 
transition towards phasic firing, we modeled the spike center of mass as a function of baseline 
burstiness and firing rate. Earlier spiking during ripples was positively correlated with 
burstiness (Figure 2G), while firing rate had no significant effect (Supp. Figure 2). This 
relationship was conserved across genotypes, as interactions were tested and found non-
significant (data not shown). These observations suggest that the loss of MCU triggers a shift 
toward phasic firing that distorts the temporal dynamics of synchronized network events, 
particularly SWRs [64]. 
Next, we examined the role of MCU in the canonical CA3-CA1 Schaffer collateral 
pathway using field excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) recordings in acute hippocampal 
slices (Figure 3A). Basal synaptic transmission, measured as the fEPSP slope relative to the 
presynaptic fiber volley amplitude, was enhanced in MCU-KO slices (Figure 3B). In addition, 
MCU-KO slices exhibited reduced short-term synaptic plasticity, evident by a significantly 
lower paired-pulse ratio (Figure 3C), and impaired long-term potentiation following theta-burst 
stimulation (Figure 3D). These findings indicate an increase in release probability [65] and 
total excitatory drive to CA1, which likely contributes to the enhanced baseline burstiness and 
cytosolic Ca2+ transients observed in MCU-KO neurons.  
Having established the baseline phenotype of MCU deletion in CA1, we next asked how 
this altered network copes with prolonged functional stress. To test the capacity for FRH in the 
intact brain, we continuously delivered the GABAB receptor agonist baclofen via osmotic 
pumps directed at CA1 (Figure 3E). While baclofen suppressed the firing rates of both control 
and MCU-KO neurons initially, their recovery trajectories gradually diverged (Figure 3F). 
Control mice successfully engaged homeostatic mechanisms, recovering steady-state firing 
 
rates back to baseline levels by the third day of the perturbation (Figure 3G). In contrast, MCU-
KO firing rates remained significantly depressed throughout the entire perturbation (Figure 
3G).  
While all MCU-KO animals failed to recover their firing rates, we observed significant 
heterogeneity between individual animals and hypothesized that the initial state of the network 
predicts its capacity for FRH. Baseline mean firing rate, averaged across units per animal, did 
not predict recovery for either genotype (Figure 3H). In contrast, high average burstiness at 
baseline predicted robust recovery in control, but not MCU-KO mice (Figure 3I). These 
findings imply that at the network level, a preference towards phasic firing is associated with 
homeostatic resilience in a manner dependent on MCU.  
Interestingly, while control neurons exhibited equal burstiness at baseline and steady-
state, the homeostatic challenge with baclofen altered the firing pattern of MCU-KO neurons 
and collapsed their compensatory state of elevated burstiness (Figure 3J). However, these in 
vivo findings reflect population distributions since individual unit identities could not be 
maintained throughout the recording period. To investigate if burstiness also carries prognostic 
meaning for homeostatic recovery at the single-cell level, and better understand why this 
relationship fails in MCU-KO, we replicated the homeostatic experiment in vitro using MEA 
recordings, which allow tracking the same units over days with a high level of certainty.  
Over the course of two days with baclofen, MCU-KO cultures exhibited significantly 
impaired FRH compared to controls (Supp. Figure X), confirming a deficit in homeostatic 
plasticity that is intrinsic to the hippocampal network. This complements our previous work 
showing that overexpressing the MCU complex rescues both burst-evoked mitoCa2+ transients 
and FRH in neurons lacking the Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 Receptor (IGF-1R), an upstream 
promoter of MCU [49]. Paired with the genetic ablation presented here, these results forge a 
definitive causal link between MCU-mediated mitoCa2+ signaling and the homeostatic 
response to baclofen. 
Next, we dissected per-unit firing rates into two components: single-spike firing and 
burst-spike firing. During the baclofen perturbation, both firing modes followed similar 
trajectories over time within each genotypes (Figure 4A). Single-spike and burst-spike firing 
gradually recovered in controls but were persistently suppressed in MCU-KO networks. This 
parallel behavior, where the two components rise and fall together, prompted us to ask whether 
homeostatic mechanisms merely scale activity irrespective of its pattern, or if there exists a 
coordinated exchange rate between tonic and phasic firing. 
To visualize how these components are co-modulated during FRH, we plotted the 
absolute difference from steady-state to baseline in single-spike firing versus burst-spike firing 
and fitted the data using orthogonal regression (Figure 4B). In Control neurons, variance was 
distributed across both axes, demonstrating a tightly coupled modulation where absolute 
changes in burst firing are accompanied by similar absolute changes in single-spike firing. In 
contrast, the variance in firing rate recovery of MCU-KO neurons was almost entirely restricted 
to the burst-firing axis. This apparent breakdown in coordination raised a critical question: does 
the absence of MCU sever the coupling between these two firing modes, or does the coupling 
exist but fail to successfully execute? 
To answer this question, we transitioned from the absolute to the relative domain. First, 
we normalized each unit to its own pre-perturbation baseline, and examined the temporal 
evolution of single-spike and burst-spike firing throughout the perturbation (Figure 4C). This 
relative perspective revealed temporal dynamics that were markedly different from the parallel 
trajectories initially observed in the raw population averages (Figure 4A). Rather than simply 
rising and falling in tandem, the normalized trajectories exposed a strategic divergence during 
the homeostatic response. Burst-spike firing of control neurons overshot baseline levels, 
presumably to compensate for a recovering, yet slightly suppressed, single-spike rate. 
 
To formalize this apparent relationship, we analyzed the state-space trajectories of single- 
and burst-spike firing gain, where gain is calculated as the log-fold ratio between steady-state 
and baseline (Figure 4D). Remarkably, both genotypes obeyed a conserved, statistically 
identical, power-law scaling. For every 10% change in burst-firing during the perturbation, 
control and MCU-KO neurons exhibited a 4.3% and 3.9% change in single-spike firing, 
respectively. To ensure that the power-law scaling between burst and single-spike recovery is 
not a byproduct of differences in baseline activity, we implemented a partial regression 
analysis. Even after regressing out baseline firing rate and burstiness, the proportional 
allocation of spikes during FRH persisted (Supp. Figure 3C). Moreover, evaluating the log-
fold gain of aggregate mean rates per animal in vivo revealed a similar positive scaling 
relationship between burst-spike and single-spike recovery (Supp. Figure 3D). Together, these 
results imply that baclofen-induced firing rate homeostasis involves coordinated plasticity of 
tonic and phasic firing, both in vitro at the single-cell level and in vivo at the network level. 
Importantly, MCU-KO neurons follow the same power-low governing the exchange of burst- 
and single-spikes as control neurons, but they fail to execute it.  
The discovery of a conserved power-law scaling in the relative domain resolves the 
apparent decoupling observed in absolute firing rates. Because the allocation of burst- and 
single-spikes operates proportionally, the divergence between genotypes in the absolute 
domain is a mathematical consequence of the burst-dominant baseline in MCU-KO neurons 
relative to control neurons. Applying any proportional modulation to this baseline during a 
homeostatic challenge will naturally force a greater absolute change in burst spikes compared 
to single spikes (Supp. Note 1). However, while this geometric relationship explains how the 
spike deficit is allocated, it does not explain the deficit itself. The conserved power-law dictates 
how burst and single spikes scale together, yet it does not guarantee that the network will 
generate enough overall activity to restore homeostasis. Thus, we shifted our focus from the 
plastic adaptation of firing patterns during FRH, to the biological capacity for executing 
homeostasis itself. Specifically, we hypothesized that the homeostatic deficit caused by MCU 
deletion is directly linked to the compensatory increase in phasic firing.  
To visualize how the initial network state influences a neuron's capacity for recovery, we 
stratified units into subgroups based on their baseline burst probability and tracked their 
normalized firing dynamics throughout the homeostatic challenge (Figure 4E). In Control 
networks, a clear prognostic hierarchy emerged: neurons entering the perturbation with a higher 
baseline burstiness mounted the most rapid and robust homeostatic rebound. Conversely, 
control neurons with low baseline burstiness exhibited a much more sluggish and incomplete 
recovery. This prognostic hierarchy appeared completely inverted in MCU-KO networks, 
where neurons exhibiting the highest initial burstiness suffered the most profound firing rate 
depression. 
To statistically quantify this relationship and disentangle the volume of activity from its 
temporal pattern, we modeled steady-state firing as a function of baseline firing rate and burst 
probability, extracting the marginal effect for each metric. Baseline firing rate served as a 
consistent positive predictor of absolute steady-state activity, exhibiting no significant 
interaction with genotype (Supp. Figure 4A). Neurons that were more active initially simply 
remained more active after the perturbation. In stark contrast, the marginal effect of baseline 
burstiness exhibited profound interactions with genotype (Supp. Figure 4B). In Control 
networks, higher baseline burstiness independently predicted robust recovery of single-spike, 
burst-spike, and total firing rates. In MCU-KO networks, these prognostic relationships were 
significantly impaired, and even inverted for single-spike recovery. MCU-KO neurons with the 
highest initial burst probability exhibited the most severe collapse in tonic firing. 
While marginal effects successfully isolate the prognostic relationship of baseline 
burstiness from the that of firing rate, they treat the recovery of single and burst spikes as 
 
independent outcomes. However, our state-space analysis demonstrated that these two firing 
modes are coupled by a conserved allocation power-law. This interdependence raises a critical 
mechanistic question: does the compensatory burstiness of MCU-KO neurons directly suppress 
their capacity to recover tonic firing, or does the baseline state primarily suppress the recovery 
of phasic firing, which subsequently drags down tonic firing through their obligatory coupling? 
To formally distinguish between a direct suppressive effect of the baseline state and an indirect 
effect mediated by the allocation power-law, we performed a causal mediation analysis 
evaluating the relationship between baseline burstiness, steady-state single-spike firing, and 
steady-state burst-spike firing (Figure 4F and Supp. Figure 4C-F). In both genotypes, baseline 
burstiness exhibited a negative direct effect on single-spike firing and a positive indirect effect 
mediated by burst-spike firing. However, the negative direct effect was twice as strong in 
MCU-KO neurons, effectively outweighing the positive indirect effect. Consequently, the net 
total effect of baseline burstiness shifted from positive in controls to negative in MCU-KO 
neurons, resulting in a failure to recover tonic firing levels. 
To definitively quantify the prognostic value of burst- versus single-spike firing, we 
performed a feature ablation analysis using k-fold cross-validation, evaluating the unique out-
of-sample variance in steady-state firing explained by each baseline firing component (Figure 
4G). Consistent with the privileged role of bursting in driving network plasticity, baseline 
burst-spike firing contributed significantly more unique prognostic information than single-
spike firing across both genotypes. However, the predictive power of burst-spike firing was 
significantly degraded in MCU-KO networks compared to Controls. Overall, these findings 
establish phasic firing as a primary feature dictating a neuron's homeostatic resilience. 
However, they also reveal that the compensatory shift toward extreme burstiness adopted by 
MCU-KO networks is profoundly maladaptive; rather than promoting resilience, this altered 
baseline state suppresses the recovery of tonic firing and compromises the adaptive information 
carried by phasic firing. 
To ensure that these physiological conclusions were independent of a specific analytical 
approach, we confirmed our findings hold across a wide range of burst detection parameters 
(Supp. Figure 5). A comprehensive parameter sweep of varying inter-spike interval (ISI) 
thresholds and minimum spike counts demonstrated that the unique prognostic value of 
baseline burst-spike firing remains remarkably stable regardless of the specific criteria used to 
define a burst. Furthermore, replicating our in vivo analyses using an autocorrelogram-derived 
Burst Index or applying the MEA dataset criteria yielded the exact same homeostatic allocation 
rules and prognostic relationships. 
Our physiological findings present a complex picture regarding the impact of MCU 
deletion. On the one hand, MCU-KO exhibited profound impairments in synaptic and 
homeostatic plasticity, as well as significantly shorter SWRs – a feature directly linked to 
working memory impairments [64]. On the other hand, baseline firing rates remained 
remarkably stable, supported by a highly burst-dominant state. To resolve whether this altered 
baseline state was sufficient to support complex behaviors, or if the underlying loss of plasticity 
and long-duration SWRs would prove dominant, we subjected MCU-KO mice and their 
littermate controls to a battery of hippocampus-dependent memory tasks. To ensure a clear 
interpretation of these cognitive assays, we first confirmed that the mice did not exhibit baseline 
differences in locomotor activity or anxiety-like behaviors that could otherwise confound 
performance (Supp. Figure 6).  
In the novel object recognition task, control mice showed a robust preference for 
exploring a novel object over a familiar one, whereas MCU-KO mice explored both objects 
equally, indicating a failure to form or retrieve the memory of the familiar object (Figure 5A,B). 
A similar impairment emerged in a social recognition paradigm, where MCU-KO mice failed 
to preferentially investigate a novel mouse over a familiar one (Figure 5C,D). These memory 
 
deficits also extended to associative learning. In a contextual fear conditioning task, MCU-KO 
mice displayed significantly less freezing behavior when re-exposed to an arena associated 
with an electric shock, demonstrating impaired memory of the fearful environment (Figure 5E-
G). Crucially, these mnemonic impairments were specific to tasks reliant on the hippocampus. 
When tested in an auditory cued fear conditioning paradigm – where memory for a tone does 
not depend on hippocampal integrity – MCU-KO mice showed freezing levels that were 
indistinguishable from controls (Figure 5H-J). Together, these cognitive deficits demonstrate 
that MCU-mediated Ca2+ signaling is indispensable for the neural computations involved in 
hippocampal-dependent memory. 
 
 
 
3 
Discussion 
These findings offer a new perspective on the evolutionary paradox of MCU. The direct 
biophysical consequence of MCU-KO is impaired rapid mitoCa2+ influx during high-
frequency stimulation. Downstream to this primary insult, the hippocampal network 
reconfigures its baseline physiology and exhibits increased burst firing, elevated cytoCa²⁺ 
dynamics, and enhanced presynaptic release probability. Enhanced release from genetically 
intact CA3 neurons indicates a retrograde trans-synaptic signal from CA1, demonstrating 
active regulation. MCU-KO neurons adjust network excitability to generate sufficient cytosolic 
drive for maintaining basal mitoCa²⁺ influx, a non-negotiable requirement for cellular viability. 
This baseline reconfiguration also converges on similar firing rates, despite impaired FRH. 
Thus, core deficits in MCU-KO models can be masked by alternative Ca²⁺ pathways and 
plasticity mechanisms, creating the appearance of mild phenotypes during resting states. 
This appearance, however, incurs a functional cost. At the network level, elevated 
burstiness predicts advanced recruitment during SWR, which are structurally and temporally 
distorted. At the synapse, elevated release probability diminishes short-term facilitation and 
restricts further potentiation, impairing Hebbian plasticity. This loss of network flexibility and 
dynamic range ultimately compromises hippocampal-dependent learning and memory. 
Because memory, SWRs, and synaptic plasticity are canonical burst-driven processes, 
their impairment despite enhanced burst firing suggests that MCU contributes to the functions 
of bursts. This dependence is definitively evident during FRH. In control neurons, higher 
baseline burstiness predicts FR recovery during long-term suppression with baclofen. Since 
bursts create the precise, localized Ca²⁺ signal required to activate MCU, and MCU has a 
fundamental role in FRH, bursty neurons engage this mechanism more effectively. In MCU-
KO neurons, this prognostic relationship is severed. The alternative calcium pathways which 
are sufficient during spontaneous activity, lack the activation kinetics of MCU and thus its 
selective response to burst firing. MCU provides bursts a direct path of communication with 
homeostatic mechanisms in mitochondria. 
We propose that MCU is conserved and ubiquitously expressed because it bridges 
intercellular communication and intracellular adaptation. By transducing salient, burst-like 
signals, MCU enables cells to self-monitor and cope with dynamic workloads and extracellular 
challenges. This directly translates to human disease. Numerous studies demonstrate that 
excessive MCU activity can exacerbate pathology, prompting proposals to target MCU as a 
therapeutic strategy. However, benign phenotypes following MCU perturbations can be 
deceiving. Latent sequala should be actively explored so that efforts to mitigate disease do not 
inadvertently compromise physiological flexibility or resilience. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Figures 
 
 
Figure 1. Elevated cytosolic Ca2+ transients compensates for MCU-mediated influx during 
baseline activity. 
(A) Quantification of MCU mRNA expression levels in the hippocampus of Control and MCU-KO 
mice, expressed as a percentage relative to control levels. Individual data points represent mice (n 
= 6). The genetic knockout resulted in significantly lower MCU mRNA expression (p = 0.002). 
(B) Representative image of a neuron expressing mtGCaMP8m-jRGeCO1a 
(C) Peak mitochondrial Ca2+ responses (mitoCa2+, ΔF/F) in Control (n = 36) and MCU-KO (n = 29) 
neurons evoked by trains of 1, 3, 5, and 10 stimuli at 50 Hz. Mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake was 
significantly reduced in MCU-KO neurons compared to Controls at 3, 5, and 10 stimuli (p < 0.001). 
Right panel shows representative traces of mitoCa2+ responses in a Control (top) and MCU-KO 
(bottom) neuron. 
(D) Peak cytosolic Ca2+ responses (cytoCa2+, ΔF/F) in Control (n = 32) and MCU-KO (n = 45) 
neurons evoked by trains of 1, 3, 5, and 10 stimuli at 50 Hz. No significant difference between 
genotypes was observed (p = 0.78). Right panel shows representative traces of cytoCa2+ responses 
in a Control (top) and MCU-KO (bottom) neuron. 
(E) Representative traces of spontaneous mitochondrial Ca2+ transients in Control and MCU-KO 
neurons. 
 
(F) Peak amplitude (ΔF/F) of spontaneous mitochondrial Ca2+ transients was not significantly different 
between Control (n = NN) and MCU-KO (n = NN) neurons (p = PP). 
(G) Average rate (Hz) of spontaneous mitochondrial Ca2+ transients was not significantly altered by 
MCU deletion (p = PP). 
(H) Total mitochondrial Ca2+ flux, calculated as the integrated area under the curve for spontaneous 
events, was not altered by MCU deletion (p = PP). 
(I) Representative traces of spontaneous cytosolic Ca2+ transients in Control and MCU-KO neurons. 
(J) Peak amplitude (ΔF/F) of spontaneous cytosolic Ca2+ transients was significantly elevated in 
MCU-KO (n = NN) relative to Control (n = NN) neurons (p = PP). 
(K) Average rate (Hz) of spontaneous cytosolic Ca2+ transients was significantly elevated in the 
absence of MCU (p = PP). 
(L) Total cytosolic Ca2+ accumulation was significantly elevated in the absence of MCU (p = 0.005). 
Panel (A, F-H, J-L) analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test. Panels (C,D) analyzed using two-way RM 
ANOVA with Sidak's multiple comparisons test. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. MCU-KO increases burstiness and alters sharp-wave ripple properties. 
(A) Firing rate (Hz) and burstiness (Pburst; logit-transformed) of Control (black) and MCU-KO (gold) 
neurons during spontaneous baseline activity. Recordings from MEA in hippocampal cultures (top 
left schematic). Marginal histograms display the distribution for each axis, with dashed lines 
indicating group means. Whereas firing rate does not differ significantly between groups (p = 0.75), 
burst probability is significantly higher in MCU-KO neurons (p = 0.002). 
(B) Same as (A) for tetrode recordings in CA1 of freely-moving mice (top left schematic). Whereas 
firing rate does not differ significantly between groups (p = 0.45), burst probability is significantly 
higher in MCU-KO neurons (p = 0.002). 
(C) Wide-band LFP traces of SWR events aligned to the ripple peak (t = 0). Data represent mean ± 
SEM across events. Asterisk denotes a significant increase in peak ripple amplitude (p = 0.045), 
calculated from the bandpass-filtered signal (80-250 Hz). 
(D) Instantaneous frequency of SWRs, calculated via Hilbert transform of the bandpass-filtered signal. 
MCU-KO exhibit a significantly faster oscillation frequency compared to Controls (p = 0.001). 
(E) Probability distribution of SWR durations. MCU-KO events are significantly shorter than Controls 
(p = 0.026). 
(F) Modulation of per-unit firing rates during SWRs (z-scored to baseline). Traces represent mean ± 
SEM across units. 
(G) Probability distribution of spike timing during SWRs, defined as the center of mass relative to the 
SWR peak (dotted vertical line). Spiking in MCU-KO neurons is significantly advanced (shifted to 
negative time lags) compared to Controls (p = 0.027; Table S1). 
(H) Marginal effect of baseline burstiness on the spike center of mass during SWRs, calculated while 
holding baseline firing rate constant at its mean. Shaded regions indicate the 95% confidence 
intervals for the predicted means. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. MCU-KO impairs synaptic and homeostatic plasticity. 
(A) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for recording field excitatory postsynaptic 
potentials (fEPSPs) in the CA1 region of acute hippocampal slices. A stimulating electrode is 
placed in the Schaffer collateral pathway originating from CA3, and a recording electrode is 
positioned in the stratum radiatum of CA1.  
(B) Input-output (I/O) curves showing the fEPSP slope (mV/ms) as a function of fiber volley amplitude 
(mV) in Control (n = 5) and MCU-KO (n = 6) slices. MCU-KO slices exhibit a significantly 
enhanced fEPSP slope for a given FV amplitude (p = 0.01), suggesting increased presynaptic 
release. 
(C) Paired-pulse ratio calculated as the ratio of the second fEPSP slope to the first with an inter-stimulus 
interval of 50 ms. Individual data points represent slices. MCU-KO slices show a significantly 
lower PPR compared to Control slices (p = 0.008), indicative of an increased probability of 
neurotransmitter release. 
(D) Long-term potentiation (LTP) at CA3-CA1 synapses. The fEPSP slope is plotted as a percentage 
of baseline over time (horizontal dashed line). Theta-burst stimulation (TBS) was delivered at t=20 
min (vertical dashed line). MCU-KO slices exhibit significantly impaired LTP compared to Control 
slices (p = 0.006). TBS consisted of 5 bursts at 100 Hz for 250 ms, with a 30-second inter-burst 
interval. 
(E) Methodology for long-term continuous drug delivery to CA1 in vivo. From left to right: Schematic 
diagram illustrating the planned stereotaxic coordinates for the implants relative to Bregma. 
Locations for EEG screw, guide cannula, tetrodes, and ground (GND) screws are indicated. 
 
Photograph of a mouse head-fixed in a stereotaxic apparatus during the surgical implantation 
procedure. The outline highlights the osmotic pump (teal), catheter (orange), and guide cannula 
(pink). Photograph of a mouse post-surgery, held in hand, showing the final assembled head-
mounted implant. Post-mortem visualization of implant placement. Photograph of the exposed 
mouse cranium showing the guide cannula and tetrodes at their final position. The inset provides 
an enlarged view of the guide cannula and tetrodes. 
(F) Firing rate dynamics of Control (N = 5; black) and MCU-KO (N = 5; gold) mice during baclofen 
perturbation (purple bar). Data represent mean ± SEM across units. Breaks in the time axis mark 
the implantation and removal of the osmotic pump.  
(G) Firing rates of individual units averaged over 24-hour epochs (experimental days) relative to 
baclofen onset (t=0). Horizontal bars indicate the mean. While control neurons recover steady-state 
firing equal to baseline (48-72 hr; p = 0.16), MCU-KO neurons remained depressed throughout the 
perturbation (p < 0.0001). Correspondingly, the interaction between genotype and time is 
symmetric initially (p = 0.30) but becomes significant at day two (24-48 hr; p = 0.0001) and day 
three (48-72 hr; p = 0.0003) of baclofen treatment. Complete LME model presented in Table SX.  
(H) Relationship between baseline firing rate and firing rate recovery, expressed as a percentage of 
baseline. Each data point represents the aggregate mean across units per mouse. ANCOVA revealed 
no significant effects. 
(I) Relationship between baseline burstiness and firing rate recovery. ANCOVA revealed a significant 
interaction between genotype and burstiness (p = 0.001). Dashed lines mark the 95% confidence 
interval of a linear regression fit per group (Control: p = 0.009; MCU-KO: p = 0.15). 
(J) Burstiness (Pburst; logit-transformed) of individual units at baseline (BSL) and steady-state (SS; after 
three days of baclofen perturbation). Horizontal bars indicate the mean. In contrast to baseline, 
MCU-KO neurons show no difference in burstiness compared to Controls (p = 0.59). 
Panels (B,D) analyzed using two-way RM ANOVA with Sidak's multiple comparisons test. Panel (C) 
analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Burstiness is a prognostic marker for homeostasis. 
(A) Temporal dynamics of single-spike firing (FRsingle; left) and burst-spike firing (FRburst; right) during 
the baclofen perturbation (purple bar).  
(B) Absolute differences in single-spike firing (ΔFRsingle) and burst-spike firing (ΔFRburst) between 
steady-state (SS) and baseline (BSL). Each point represents a single unit. Dotted crosshairs mark 
the point of no change. Solid lines depict orthogonal regression fits. The annotated angle quantifies 
the predominant direction of rate changes relative to the unity line (dashed), which represents a 
proportional modulation of both components. 
(C) Temporal dynamics of single-spike firing (solid) and burst-spike firing (dotted) during the baclofen 
perturbation. Each neuron’s trace was normalized to its pre-perturbation baseline (dotted line). Data 
presented as geometric mean ± SEM across the population. 
(D) State space analysis of spike allocation during firing rate homeostasis for Control (left) and MCU-
KO (right) neurons. Single-spike firing gain as a function of burst-spike firing gain, where gain is 
calculated as the log-fold ratio between steady-state and baseline. Solid lines depict linear 
regression fits. Burst-spike gain significantly predicts single-spike gain (β = 0.43; p < 0.0001) with 
no significant interaction by genotype (β = -0.04; p = 0.22). A significant negative main effect of 
genotype (β = -0.97; p = 0.001) shifts the trajectory of MCU-KO neurons vertically downward. 
Complete LME model presented in Table SX.   
(E) Firing rate dynamics during the baclofen perturbation for neurons stratified by baseline burstiness. 
Control units (left) were categorized into low (< 0.1; n = 389; dotted), intermediate (0.1-0.2; n = 
234; dashed), and high (> 0.2; n = 78; solid) burst probability. MCU-KO units (right) were 
categorized into low (< 0.4; n = 211), intermediate (0.4-0.8; n = 126), and high (> 0.8; n = 42) burst 
probability. Data are expressed as a percentage of baseline (dotted line) and presented as geometric 
mean ± SEM. 
 
(F) Mediation analysis of the relationship between baseline burstiness and steady-state firing. A series 
of three LME models were fitted separately for Control and MCU-KO neurons to disentangle the 
direct effect of baseline burstiness (X; [BSL]Pburst) on single-spike firing (Y; [SS]FRsingle) from 
its indirect effect mediated by burst-spike firing (M; [SS]FRburst). All models included baseline 
firing rate as a covariate. Stacked bars represent standardized coefficients (β) for the direct (blank) 
and indirect (stripes) pathways. Black diamonds indicate the net total effect. Vertical lines mark the 
SEM of each effect. In control neurons, a minimal direct effect (β = -0.278 ± 0.051, p < 0.0001) is 
outweighed by a positive indirect effect (β = 0.528 ± 0.048, p < 0.0001), resulting in a net positive 
total effect (β = 0.247 ± 0.063, p < 0.0001), where higher baseline burstiness predicts robust 
recovery of tonic firing. Conversely, MCU-KO neurons exhibit a severe negative direct effect (β = 
-0.591 ± 0.095, p < 0.0001) that negated the indirect coupling (β = 0.252 ± 0.08, p = 0.001), leading 
to a net negative total effect and a collapse in tonic firing (β = -0.33 ± 0.123, p < 0.0001). Complete 
LME models presented in Table SX. 
(G) Feature ablation analysis, utilizing k-fold cross-validation, performed on an LME model predicting 
steady-state firing rate from baseline firing components ([SS]FR ~ [BSL]FRburst + [BSL]FRsingle 
+ (1|Name)). The y-axis quantifies the unique variance explained by each predictor, calculated as 
the absolute reduction in the out-of-sample coefficient of determination (∆R2OOS) when that term 
is removed from the full model (Control R2OOS = 0.29; MCU-KO R2OOS = 0.26). Dots represent 
individual cross-validation folds. Horizontal bars indicate the mean. FRburst contributes 
significantly more unique information than FRsingle across both groups, and significantly more in 
control than MCU-KO. Two-way RM ANOVA followed by Fisher’s LSD post-hoc tests.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. MCU-KO impairs hippocampal-dependent memory. 
(A) Schematic of the Novel Object Recognition (NOR) task. During the learning phase, mice explore 
an arena containing two identical objects (one depicted for simplicity). During the test phase (after 
a 20-minute inter-trial interval), one object is replaced with a novel object, and exploration times 
of both objects are recorded. 
(B) Discrimination Index for the NOR task. Individual data points represent mice (Control: n = 13; 
MCU-KO: n = 12), and horizontal bars indicate the group mean. Whereas both groups spent equal 
time exploring the two objects during learning (p = 0.45), control mice showed a preference for the 
novel object during the test phase that was completely absent in MCU-KO mice (p = 0.004). 
(C) Schematic of the Social Recognition task. During the learning phase, mice interact with a juvenile 
conspecific mouse. During the test phase (after a 30-minute inter-trial interval), mice are re-exposed 
to the familiar juvenile along with a novel juvenile conspecific, and interaction times are recorded. 
(D) Discrimination Index for the Social Recognition task. Individual data points represent mice 
(Control: n = 18; MCU-KO: n = 17), and horizontal bars indicate the group mean. During the 
learning phase, both groups spent equal time exploring the two mice (p = 0.45). During the 
recognition phase, control mice showed a preference for the novel mouse that was completely 
absent in MCU-KO mice (p = 0.004). 
(E) Schematic of the Contextual Fear Conditioning (CFC) task. Mice placed in a conditioning chamber 
receive 3 electrical shocks (represented by a lightning bolt). During the test phase (after 24 hours), 
mice return to the same conditioning chamber, and freezing behavior is measured. 
(F) Percentage of time spent freezing during the contextual fear memory test phase. MCU-KO mice (n 
= 25) display significantly lower contextual freezing compared to Control mice (n = 21; p = 0.043). 
 
(G) Temporal dynamics of freezing behavior during the CFC test phase, presented as mean ± SEM. 
MCU-KO mice exhibited reduced freezing levels compared to control mice (p = 0.043).  
(H) Schematic of the Auditory Cued Fear Conditioning task. Mice placed in a conditioning chamber 
where an auditory cue (represented by a speaker icon) is paired with electrical shocks. During the 
test phase (after 24 hours), mice are placed in a novel context (altered visual and olfactory cues), 
and freezing behavior is measured during the presentation of the auditory cue alone. 
(I) Percentage of time spent freezing during the cued fear memory test in the novel context. No 
significant difference in cued freezing was observed between Control (n = 22) and MCU-KO mice 
(n = 24; p = 0.23). 
(J) Temporal dynamics of freezing behavior during the cued fear memory test phase. No significant 
difference was found between groups (p = 0.31) 
Panels (B,D,G,J) analyzed using a two-way RM ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple comparisons 
test. Panel (F) analyzed using an unpaired t test. Panel (I) analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test. 
 
 
 
 
 
Supp. Figure 1. Extracellular recordings from CA1 in behaving mice. 
(A) Representative baseline data from a control mouse. From top to bottom: hypnogram; spectrogram; 
EMG recordings; raster plot of RS (black) and FS (red) units; raw traces from a single tetrode. 
Dashed lines indicate an expanded view of the section above.  
(B) Trough-to-Peak time (ms) and Burst Index (a.u.) of RS and FS units from MCU-KO and Control 
mice. Individual data points represent neurons with point size proportional to their firing rate. 
Assignment of well-isolated clusters to RS and FS was done using a Gaussian Mixture Model 
(GMM) based on waveform features. FS units were excluded from this study due to low unit count. 
(C) Representative waveform of an RS unit (top) and an FS unit (bottom) across four channels of a 
tetrode. 
(D) Representative autocorrelograms of an RS unit (top) and an FS unit (bottom).  
 
 
 
 
 
Supp. Figure 2. MCU-KO alters SWR properties.   
(A) Marginal effect of baseline firing rate on the spike center of mass during SWRs, calculated while 
holding baseline burstiness constant at its mean. Shaded regions indicate the 95% confidence 
intervals for the predicted means. Firing rate did not significantly predict spike timing during SWR 
(p = 0.1; Table SX). 
 
 
 
 
Supp. Figure 3. Homeostatic allocation of spikes  
(A) Burst and single spike firing rates in Control (black) and MCU-KO (gold) neurons during baseline 
(BSL). Marginal histograms display the distribution of firing rates for each axis, with dashed lines 
indicating the group means. 
(B) Same as (A) during steady-state (SS), after two days of baclofen.  
(C) Partial regression plot showing the unique variance shared between log-fold changes in single-spike 
firing (FRsingle Gain) and burst-spike firing (FRburst Gain). To isolate the specific coupling between 
these variables, residuals were calculated by regressing out baseline firing rate and burstiness from 
each component. Solid lines depict linear regression fits. Dotted crosshairs mark the zero-residual 
center. Burst-spike residuals significantly predicts single-spike residuals (β = 0.43; p < 0.0001). A 
small but significant interaction by genotype (β = +0.07; p = 0.035) indicates this coupling is 
stronger in MCU-KO neurons. Because the data represents mean-centered residuals, the regression 
lines cross exactly at zero with no main effect of genotype (β = 0; p = 1). Complete LME model 
presented in Table SX. 
(D) Spike allocation in vivo. Relationship between burst-spike gain and single-spike gain, where gain 
is calculated as the log-ratio of the average rate during steady-state relative to baseline, and the 
average rate is the aggregate mean across units per mouse (N = 5 animals per group). ANCOVA 
revealed a significant main effect of burst gain (p = 0.034) but not of genotype (p = 0.59) and no 
interaction (p = 0.53). Consequently, a pooled regression model confirmed a conserved positive 
scaling rule across mice (p = 0.006). Dashed lines mark the 95% confidence interval of the linear 
regression fit. 
 
 
 
Supp. Figure 4. Burstiness but not firing rate predicts firing rate recovery 
(A) Marginal effects of baseline firing rate on steady-state firing, calculated while holding baseline 
burstiness constant at its mean. Effects are shown for single-spike firing (left), burst-spike firing 
(middle), and total firing rate (right). Shaded regions indicate the 95% confidence intervals for the 
predicted means.  
(B) Same as (A) for the marginal effects of baseline burstiness, calculated while holding baseline firing 
rate constant at its mean.  
(C-F) Scatter plots visualizing the causal mediation analysis pathways. For each panel, the 
annotated β and p-values represent the standardized coefficients derived from separate LME models 
per genotype, evaluating the relative within-group effects. Bracket on the right denote the 
interaction p-value (genotype × predictor) derived from a separate, combined unstandardized LME 
model to test whether the absolute biological slopes differ between groups. 
(C) (X → M): Relationship between baseline burstiness and steady-state burst-spike firing. β derived 
from Model 2: M ~ X + Covariates. 
(D) (M → Y | X): Partial residual plot showing the relationship between steady-state burst-spike firing 
(M; [SS]FRburst) and single-spike firing (Y; [SS]FRsingle), adjusted for baseline firing rate and 
burstiness (X; [BSL]Pburst). The Y-axis represents the variance in single-spike firing unexplained 
by the baseline phenotype. β represents the standardized coefficient of FRburst from Model 1: Y ~ 
M + X + Covariates. 
 
(E) (X → Y | M): Partial residual plot showing the direct effect of baseline burstiness on steady-state 
single-spike firing, adjusted for steady-state burst-spike firing. β represents the standardized 
coefficient of Pburst from Model 1. 
(F) (X → Y): The total effect (net prognostic relationship) of baseline burstiness on steady-state single-
spike firing. β derived from Model 3: Y ~ X + Covariates. 
 
 
 
 
 
Supp. Figure 5. The impact of burstiness is stable across various detection parameters.  
(A) Parameter sweep of burst detection criteria in MEA recordings, including inter-spike interval (ISI) 
thresholds (y-axis) and minimum number of spikes (x-axis). Labels show the percentage of Control 
units with zero detected bursts during baseline.   
(B) Same as (A) showing the Spearman rank correlation coefficient between baseline firing rate and 
burstiness in Control units. Firing rate was included as a covariate in all models involving 
burstiness.  
(C) Same as (A) showing the t-statistic for the effect of genotype on burstiness. Positive values indicate 
significantly higher burstiness in MCU-KO neurons.  
(D) Replication of the feature ablation analysis with various ISI thresholds for detecting bursts 
(minimum spike count fixed at 3). Stacked bars display the unique variance (∆R2OOS) in steady-state 
firing rate explained by baseline burst-spike firing (dotted), single-spike firing (solid gray), and 
their shared contribution (white). Related to Figure 4G. 
(E) Replication of the prognostic relationship between baseline burstiness and firing rate recovery in 
vivo using alternative burst metrics. Left: Relationship using a Burst Index derived from the spike-
train autocorrelogram. Right: Relationship using the same criteria for detecting bursts as in the 
MEA dataset. Related to Figure 3J. 
(F) Replication of the homeostatic allocation of spikes in vivo using the same criteria for 
detecting bursts as in the MEA dataset. Related to Supp. Figure 3E.  
 
 
 
 
 
Supp. Figure 6. MCU-KO does not affect locomotor activity and anxiety-like behavior. 
(A) Total distance traveled (meters) by Control (n = 25) and MCU-KO (n = 22) mice across three 
consecutive 5-minute Open Field sessions (OF1, OF2, OF3). Both groups traveled significantly less 
distance across sessions, indicating habituation (p < 0.0001). However, there was no significant 
difference in travel distance between groups (p = 0.46) and no significant interaction between group 
and session (p = 0.63). 
(B) Total time (seconds) spent in the center zone of the open field, an indicator of anxiety-like behavior. 
Both groups exhibited a significant decrease in center time across sessions, reflecting habituation 
(p < 0.0001). However, there was no significant difference between groups (p = 0.21) and no 
significant interaction between group and session (p = 0.27). 
(C) Total distance (meters) traveled by Control and MCU-KO mice during the first Open Field session 
(OF1). No significant difference in locomotor activity is observed between Control and MCU-KO 
mice (p = 0.22).  
(D) Total duration spent in the center zone of the open field (s) by Control and MCU-KO mice during 
the first Open Field session. Individual data points represent mice. No significant difference in 
center time is observed between Control and MCU-KO mice (p = 0.45). 
Panels (A,B) analyzed using two-way RM ANOVA. Panels (C,D) analyzed using the Mann-Whitney 
test.  
 
 
 
 
Supp. Note 1. Mathematical Derivation of Prognostic Markers for FRH 
This mathematical framework unifies several empirical findings into a single boundary condition 
governing firing rate homeostasis (FRH). State-space analysis demonstrates that FRH is governed by a 
power-law that couples recovery of tonic firing to the recovery of phasic firing: 
ln(𝑆𝑖
𝑆𝑆/𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿) = 𝛽ln(𝐵𝑖
𝑆𝑆/𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿) + 𝑐
(1) 
Where 𝛽 is the scaling coefficient and 𝑐 is the intercept capturing baseline vertical shifts between 
groups. Variables 𝑆𝑖
𝑡 and 𝐵𝑖
𝑡 represent the single-spike and burst-spike firing rates of unit 𝑖 at time 𝑡=
𝐵𝑆𝐿 (baseline) or 𝑡= 𝑆𝑆 (steady-state). Recovery is formalized as gain, the natural log-fold ratio of 
steady-state to baseline firing. 
Exponentiating both sides, we convert the log-transformed additive relationship into its underlying 
multiplicative form: 
𝑆𝑖
𝑆𝑆= 𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿𝐶( 𝐵𝑖
𝑆𝑆
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿)
𝛽
(2) 
Where 𝐶= 𝑒𝑐. By substituting 𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿+ Δ𝐵𝑖 for 𝐵𝑖
𝑆𝑆 and subtracting 𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿 from both sides, we isolate 
the difference in single-spike firing (Δ𝑆𝑖) as a function of the difference in burst-spike firing (Δ𝐵𝑖): 
Δ𝑆𝑖= 𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿[𝐶(1 + Δ𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿)
𝛽
−1]
(3) 
This formulates the experimental data in Figure 4B as a spike-exchange in absolute terms (𝐻𝑧). To 
study how these two variables scale with one another, we take the derivative of Δ𝑆𝑖 with respect to Δ𝐵𝑖: 
𝑑(Δ𝑆𝑖)
𝑑(Δ𝐵𝑖) = 𝐶𝛽𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿(1 + Δ𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿)
𝛽−1
 
Evaluating this derivative at its origin, which represents the baseline state where Δ𝐵𝑖= 0, provides the 
initial tangent of spike exchange. This theoretically corresponds to the slope of the orthogonal 
regression fit presented in Figure 4B. 
lim
Δ𝐵𝑖→0
𝑑(Δ𝑆𝑖)
𝑑(Δ𝐵𝑖) = 𝐶𝛽𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿
(4) 
For any given power-law coefficient 𝛽, the trajectory of exchange relies squarely on initial firing modes. 
Because MCU-KO and Control neurons follow the same power-law (𝛽𝐾𝑂≈𝛽𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙), their trajectories 
diverge as a direct consequence of their baseline state. The apparent breakdown of coordination in 
absolute terms is due to a conserved relative allocation operating upon a burst-dominant baseline. 
While Equation 1 defines the trajectory of homeostatic recovery, it does not account for a neuron’s 
ability to generate activity along that path. However, it does imply that any increase in phasic firing will 
obligatorily include an increase in tonic firing. Causal mediation analysis demonstrates that baseline 
burstiness predicts steady-state phasic firing. We formulate this prediction using phasic recovery: 
ln ( 𝐵𝑖
𝑆𝑆
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿) = 𝛼+ 𝛼𝜌𝜌𝑖
(5) 
Where 𝜌𝑖 is a neuron’s baseline burst probability, 𝛼𝜌 is the positive effect of baseline burstiness on 
phasic recovery, and 𝛼 is the expected phasic recovery when baseline burstiness is zero. Exponentiating 
both sides and isolating steady-state: 
𝐵𝑖
𝑆𝑆= 𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿𝑒𝛼+𝛼𝜌𝜌𝑖
(6) 
Substituting 𝐵𝑖
𝑆𝑆 in Equation 2 and rearranging the terms yields: 
𝑆𝑖
𝑆𝑆= 𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿𝐶(𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿𝑒𝛼+𝛼𝜌𝜌𝑖
𝐵𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿
)
𝛽
 
 
𝑆𝑖
𝑆𝑆= 𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿𝐶(𝑒𝛼+𝛼𝜌𝜌𝑖)𝛽 
𝑆𝑖
𝑆𝑆= 𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿𝐶𝑒𝛽𝛼+𝛽𝛼𝜌𝜌𝑖
(7) 
Equation 7 reveals how baseline burstiness has an indirect effect on tonic recovery mediated by its 
positive relationship with phasic recovery. 
Mediation analysis also suggests that baseline burstiness exerts a distinct, direct negative effect on tonic 
recovery. Since this direct effect operates independently of the indirect effect, it must functionally act 
upon the multiplier 𝐶. To formulate this, we redefine the genotype-specific intercept 𝑐 from Equation 
1 as a cell-specific dynamic parameter 𝑐𝑖: 
𝑐𝑖= 𝛾+ 𝛾𝜌𝜌𝑖 
Where 𝛾𝜌 is the direct negative effect and 𝛾 is the expected gain in tonic firing when baseline burstiness 
is zero. Exponentiating both sides produces the dynamic, cell-specific multiplier 𝐶𝑖: 
𝐶𝑖= 𝑒𝛾+𝛾𝜌𝜌𝑖
(8) 
Substituting 𝐶𝑖 for 𝐶 in Equation 7 and factoring out 𝜌𝑖 yields: 
𝑆𝑖
𝑆𝑆= 𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿𝑒𝛾+𝛾𝜌𝜌𝑖𝑒𝛽𝛼+𝛽𝛼𝜌𝜌𝑖 
𝑆𝑖
𝑆𝑆= 𝑆𝑖
𝐵𝑆𝐿𝑒(𝛾+𝛽𝛼)+(𝛾𝜌+𝛽𝛼𝜌)𝜌𝑖
(9) 
 
This closed-form expression of tonic firing at steady-state fully maps the mediation analysis into a 
unified framework of FRH at the single-cell level. Importantly, it allows directly isolating the points of 
vulnerability in MCU-KO neurons, which fail to execute a conserved power-law due to their 
compensatory burst-dominant baseline and a fundamental homeostatic deficit. 
𝜷 
The proportional coupling of tonic and phasic recovery suggests that homeostatic mechanisms do not 
regulate these firing modes individually, but rather globally scales excitability and/or synaptic weights. 
This coupling is independent of MCU. The experimental value 𝛽∼0.4 could reflect a statistical 
consequence of using relative (log-fold) metrics. For a given absolute change, the relative change in 
phasic firing will be greater than tonic firing simply because burst-spikes are sparse. However, since 
𝛽𝐾𝑂≈𝛽𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙 despite higher burstiness in MCU-KO neurons, and 𝛽< 1 even after regressing out 
baseline activity (Figure S3C), it more likely reflects a biological restraint of homeostatic plasticity. 
(𝜸𝝆+ 𝜷𝜶𝝆)𝝆𝒊 
High baseline burstiness reduces the homeostatic resilience of MCU-KO neurons through a compound 
vulnerability. Despite a conserved power-law 𝛽, the predictive relationship between burstiness and 
phasic recovery 𝛼𝜌 is significantly lower for MCU-KO neurons. This compromises the positive indirect 
pathway 𝛽𝛼𝜌, preventing MCU-KO neurons from utilizing burstiness to facilitate tonic recovery.  
In parallel, baseline burstiness directly lowers tonic recovery independently of phasic recovery. 
Whether this suppression reflects a direct biophysical cost or merely correlates with an underlying 
vulnerability, it is fundamental to FRH as both Control and MCU-KO neurons exhibit negative 𝛾𝜌 
coefficients. However, due to their baseline burstiness, MCU-KO neurons are forced to the extreme 
edge of this effect. 
(𝜸+ 𝜷𝜶) 
Holding baseline burstiness at zero, hippocampal neurons are still expected to recover tonic and phasic 
firing during FRH. The expected recovery of phasic firing 𝛼 is equal in MCU-KO and Control 
networks, as is its contribution to tonic recovery via proportional coupling. However, the expected 
recovery of tonic firing 𝛾 is severely limited by MCU-KO. Therefore, 𝛾 represents a fundamental 
homeostatic deficit, suggesting that MCU-mediated mitochondrial Ca2+ influx acts as a direct 
transducer of homeostatic plasticity, independent of a neuron’s firing pattern. 
 
 
Symbol 
Definition 
Functional Significance 
Genotype Effect 
𝑆𝑖 
𝐹𝑅𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 
Single-spike firing rate. 
 
𝐵𝑖 
𝐹𝑅𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡 
Burst-spike firing rate. 
 
𝜌𝑖 
𝑃𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡 
Baseline burst probability. 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙< 𝐾𝑂 
𝛽 
𝑀→𝑌|𝑋 
coefficient 
Scaling exponent of the power-law quantifying the 
proportional allocation of firing modes during FRH. 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙= 𝐾𝑂∼0.4 
𝛾𝜌 
𝑋→𝑌|𝑀 
coefficient 
Direct effect of baseline burstiness on tonic recovery 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙= 𝐾𝑂< 0 
𝛾 
𝑋→𝑌|𝑀 
intercept 
Expected tonic recovery when baseline burstiness is zero. 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙> 𝐾𝑂 
𝐶𝑖 
𝑒𝛾+𝛾𝜌𝜌𝑖 
Cell-specific multiplier that scales tonic recovery 
independently of proportional allocation.  
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙> 𝐾𝑂 
𝛼𝜌 
𝑋→𝑀 
coefficient 
Effect of baseline burstiness on phasic recovery. 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙> 𝐾𝑂> 0 
𝛼 
𝑋→𝑀 
intercept 
Expected gain in phasic firing when baseline burstiness is 
zero. 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙= 𝐾𝑂 
𝛽𝛼𝜌 
𝑋→𝑀→𝑌 
Indirect effect of baseline burstiness on tonic recovery. 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙> 𝐾𝑂> 0 
𝛾𝜌+ 𝛽𝛼𝜌 
𝑋→𝑌 
Total effect of baseline burstiness on tonic recovery. 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙> 0; 𝐾𝑂< 0 
Note: Comparisons in this table reflect unstandardized coefficients derived from combined LME 
models testing for genotype interactions. The standardized coefficients presented in Figure 4F and 
Figure S4C-F were derived from LME models fitted separately for Control and MCU-KO. Because 
MCU-KO neurons exhibit greater variance in baseline burstiness, their standardized coefficients appear 
larger than control despite a non-significant interaction when modeled together. Complete LME results 
presented in Table SX. 
Note: While the empirical mediation models include total baseline firing rate as a statistical covariate 
to isolate the effect of firing pattern, the idealized mathematical framework presented here uses the 
respective baseline firing mode to satisfy the algebraic requirements of proportional allocation. 
 
 
 
 
5 
References 
1. 
Hajnóczky, G., et al., Decoding of cytosolic calcium oscillations in the mitochondria. Cell, 1995. 82(3): p. 
415–424. 
2. 
Kaftan, E.J., et al., Mitochondria Shape Hormonally Induced Cytoplasmic Calcium Oscillations and 
Modulate Exocytosis *. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 2000. 275(33): p. 25465–25470. 
3. 
Cartes-Saavedra, B., A. Ghosh, and G. Hajnóczky, The roles of mitochondria in global and local 
intracellular calcium signalling. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 2025: p. 1–20. 
4. 
Baughman, J.M., et al., Integrative genomics identifies MCU as an essential component of the 
mitochondrial calcium uniporter. Nature, 2011. 476(7360): p. 341–345. 
5. 
De Stefani, D., et al., A forty-kilodalton protein of the inner membrane is the mitochondrial calcium 
uniporter. Nature, 2011. 476(7360): p. 336–340. 
6. 
Billups, B. and I.D. Forsythe, Presynaptic mitochondrial calcium sequestration influences transmission at 
mammalian central synapses. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for 
Neuroscience, 2002. 22(14): p. 5840–5847. 
7. 
Kim, H.Y., et al., Mitochondrial Ca2+ Uptake Is Essential for Synaptic Plasticity in Pain. The Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2011. 31(36): p. 12982–12991. 
8. 
Huang, G., A.E. Vercesi, and R. Docampo, Essential regulation of cell bioenergetics in Trypanosoma 
brucei by the mitochondrial calcium uniporter. Nature Communications, 2013. 4(1): p. 2865. 
9. 
Pan, X., et al., The physiological role of mitochondrial calcium revealed by mice lacking the mitochondrial 
calcium uniporter. Nature Cell Biology, 2013. 15(12): p. 1464–1472. 
10. 
Qiu, J., et al., Mitochondrial calcium uniporter Mcu controls excitotoxicity and is transcriptionally 
repressed by neuroprotective nuclear calcium signals. Nature Communications, 2013. 4(1): p. 2034. 
11. 
Kwong, J.Q., et al., The Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter Selectively Matches Metabolic Output to Acute 
Contractile Stress in the Heart. Cell Reports, 2015. 12(1): p. 15–22. 
12. 
Drago, I. and R.L. Davis, Inhibiting the Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter during Development Impairs 
Memory in Adult Drosophila. Cell Reports, 2016. 16(10): p. 2763–2776. 
13. 
Marland, J.R.K., et al., Mitochondrial Calcium Uptake Modulates Synaptic Vesicle Endocytosis in Central 
Nerve Terminals *. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 2016. 291(5): p. 2080–2086. 
14. 
Kwon, S.-K., et al., LKB1 Regulates Mitochondria-Dependent Presynaptic Calcium Clearance and 
Neurotransmitter Release Properties at Excitatory Synapses along Cortical Axons. PLOS Biology, 2016. 
14(7): p. e1002516. 
15. 
Tufi, R., et al., Comprehensive Genetic Characterization of Mitochondrial Ca2+ Uniporter Components 
Reveals Their Different Physiological Requirements In Vivo. Cell Reports, 2019. 27(5): p. 1541–1550.e5. 
16. 
Flicker, D., et al., Exploring the In Vivo Role of the Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter in Brown Fat 
Bioenergetics. Cell Reports, 2019. 27(5): p. 1364–1375.e5. 
17. 
Álvarez-Illera, P., et al., Mitochondrial Ca2+ Dynamics in MCU Knockout C. elegans Worms. 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 2020. 21(22): p. 8622. 
18. 
Georgiadou, E., et al., The pore-forming subunit MCU of the mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter is required 
for normal glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in vitro and in vivo in mice. Diabetologia, 2020. 63(7): p. 
1368–1381. 
19. 
Ashrafi, G., et al., Molecular Tuning of the Axonal Mitochondrial Ca2+ Uniporter Ensures Metabolic 
Flexibility of Neurotransmission. Neuron, 2020. 105(4): p. 678–687.e5. 
20. 
Calvo-Rodriguez, M., et al., Increased mitochondrial calcium levels associated with neuronal death in a 
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature Communications, 2020. 11(1): p. 2146. 
21. 
Wu, H., et al., Genetic Ablation of the Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter (MCU) Does not Impair T Cell-
Mediated Immunity In Vivo. Frontiers in Pharmacology, 2021. 12. 
22. 
Serrat, R., et al., Astroglial ER-mitochondria calcium transfer mediates endocannabinoid-dependent 
synaptic integration. Cell Reports, 2021. 37(12). 
23. 
Ruberti, C., et al., MCU proteins dominate in vivo mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake in Arabidopsis roots. The 
Plant Cell, 2022. 34(11): p. 4428–4452. 
24. 
Devine, M.J., et al., Mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter haploinsufficiency enhances long-term potentiation at 
hippocampal mossy fibre synapses. Journal of Cell Science, 2022. 135(22): p. jcs259823. 
25. 
Zampese, E., et al., Ca2+ channels couple spiking to mitochondrial metabolism in substantia nigra 
dopaminergic neurons. Science Advances, 2022. 8(39): p. eabp8701. 
 
26. 
Doser, R.L., et al., Activity-dependent mitochondrial ROS signaling regulates recruitment of glutamate 
receptors to synapses. eLife, 2024. 13: p. e92376. 
27. 
Carafoli, E. and A.L. Lehninger, A survey of the interaction of calcium ions with mitochondria from 
different tissues and species. Biochemical Journal, 1971. 122(5): p. 681–690. 
28. 
Bick, A.G., S.E. Calvo, and V.K. Mootha, Evolutionary Diversity of the Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter. 
Science, 2012. 336(6083): p. 886–886. 
29. 
Teardo, E., et al., Physiological Characterization of a Plant Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter in Vitro 
and in Vivo. Plant Physiology, 2017. 173(2): p. 1355–1370. 
30. 
Pittis, A.A., et al., Discovery of EMRE in fungi resolves the true evolutionary history of the mitochondrial 
calcium uniporter. Nature Communications, 2020. 11(1): p. 4031. 
31. 
Xu, S. and A.D. Chisholm, C. elegans Epidermal Wounding Induces a Mitochondrial ROS Burst that 
Promotes Wound Repair. Developmental Cell, 2014. 31(1): p. 48–60. 
32. 
Murphy, E., et al., Unresolved questions from the analysis of mice lacking MCU expression. Biochemical 
and Biophysical Research Communications, 2014. 449(4): p. 384–385. 
33. 
Langenbacher, A.D., et al., Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter Deficiency in Zebrafish Causes 
Cardiomyopathy With Arrhythmia. Frontiers in Physiology, 2020. 11. 
34. 
Wu, Y., et al., The mitochondrial uniporter controls fight or flight heart rate increases. Nature 
Communications, 2015. 6(1): p. 6081. 
35. 
Kwong, J.Q., et al., The mitochondrial calcium uniporter underlies metabolic fuel preference in skeletal 
muscle. JCI Insight, 2018. 3(22). 
36. 
Liao, Q., et al., Liver knockout of MCU leads to greater dysregulation of lipid metabolism in MAFLD. 
Scientific Reports, 2024. 14(1): p. 28167. 
37. 
Lee, C.W. and H.B. Peng, The function of mitochondria in presynaptic development at the neuromuscular 
junction. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 2008. 19(1): p. 150–158. 
38. 
Sun, T., et al., Motile Axonal Mitochondria Contribute to the Variability of Presynaptic Strength. Cell 
Reports, 2013. 4(3): p. 413–419. 
39. 
Gazit, N., et al., IGF-1 Receptor Differentially Regulates Spontaneous and Evoked Transmission via 
Mitochondria at Hippocampal Synapses. Neuron, 2016. 89(3): p. 583–597. 
40. 
Groten, C.J. and B.A. MacVicar, Mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake by the MCU facilitates pyramidal neuron 
excitability and metabolism during action potential firing. Communications Biology, 2022. 5(1): p. 1–15. 
41. 
O’Hare, J.K., et al., Compartment-specific tuning of dendritic feature selectivity by intracellular Ca2+ 
release. Science, 2022. 
42. 
Pannoni, K.E., et al., MCU expression in hippocampal CA2 neurons modulates dendritic mitochondrial 
morphology and synaptic plasticity. Scientific Reports, 2025. 15(1): p. 4540. 
43. 
Marom, S. and E. Marder, A biophysical perspective on the resilience of neuronal excitability across 
timescales. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2023. 24(10): p. 640–652. 
44. 
Marder, E. and J.-M. Goaillard, Variability, compensation and homeostasis in neuron and network 
function. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2006. 7(7): p. 563–574. 
45. 
Hengen, Keith B., et al., Firing Rate Homeostasis in Visual Cortex of Freely Behaving Rodents. Neuron, 
2013. 80(2): p. 335–342. 
46. 
Keck, T., et al., Synaptic Scaling and Homeostatic Plasticity in the Mouse Visual Cortex In Vivo. Neuron, 
2013. 80(2): p. 327–334. 
47. 
Slomowitz, E., et al., Interplay between population firing stability and single neuron dynamics in 
hippocampal networks. eLife, 2015. 4: p. e04378. 
48. 
Styr, B., et al., Mitochondrial Regulation of the Hippocampal Firing Rate Set Point and Seizure 
Susceptibility. Neuron, 2019. 
49. 
Katsenelson, M., et al., IGF-1 receptor regulates upward firing rate homeostasis via the mitochondrial 
calcium uniporter. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2022. 119(33): p. e2121040119. 
50. 
Ruggiero, A., et al., NMDA receptors regulate the firing rate set point of hippocampal circuits without 
altering single-cell dynamics. Neuron, 2025. 113(2): p. 244–259.e7. 
51. 
Frere, S. and I. Slutsky, Alzheimer’s Disease: From Firing Instability to Homeostasis Network Collapse. 
Neuron, 2018. 97(1): p. 32–58. 
52. 
Styr, B. and I. Slutsky, Imbalance between firing homeostasis and synaptic plasticity drives early-phase 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nature Neuroscience, 2018. 21(4): p. 463. 
 
53. 
Zarhin, D., et al., Disrupted neural correlates of anesthesia and sleep reveal early circuit dysfunctions in 
Alzheimer models. Cell Reports, 2022. 38(3): p. 110268. 
54. 
Ruggiero, A., M. Katsenelson, and I. Slutsky, Mitochondria: new players in homeostatic regulation of 
firing rate set points. Trends in Neurosciences, 2021. 
55. 
Lin, Y., et al., Brain activity regulates loose coupling between mitochondrial and cytosolic Ca2+ 
transients. Nature Communications, 2019. 10(1): p. 5277. 
56. 
Kushnireva, L., et al., Dynamic Regulation of Mitochondrial [Ca2+] in Hippocampal Neurons. 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 2022. 23(20): p. 12321. 
57. 
Stoler, O., et al., Frequency- and spike-timing-dependent mitochondrial Ca2+ signaling regulates the 
metabolic rate and synaptic efficacy in cortical neurons. eLife, 2022. 11: p. e74606. 
58. 
Lisman, J.E., Bursts as a unit of neural information: making unreliable synapses reliable. Trends in 
Neurosciences, 1997. 20(1): p. 38–43. 
59. 
Korde, A.S. and W.F. Maragos, Identification of an N-Methyl-d-aspartate Receptor in Isolated Nervous 
System Mitochondria *. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 2012. 287(42): p. 35192–35200. 
60. 
Wang, P., et al., Why don’t mice lacking the mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter experience an energy crisis? 
The Journal of physiology, 2020. 598(7): p. 1307–1326. 
61. 
Petersen, C.E., et al., Increased mitochondrial free Ca2+ during ischemia is suppressed, but not eliminated 
by, germline deletion of the mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter. Cell Reports, 2023. 42(7): p. 112735. 
62. 
Bround, M.J., et al., MCU-independent Ca2+ uptake mediates mitochondrial Ca2+ overload and necrotic 
cell death in a mouse model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Scientific Reports, 2024. 14(1): p. 6751. 
63. 
Csicsvari, J., et al., Oscillatory Coupling of Hippocampal Pyramidal Cells and Interneurons in the 
Behaving Rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 1999. 19(1): p. 274–287. 
64. 
Fernández-Ruiz, A., et al., Long-duration hippocampal sharp wave ripples improve memory. Science, 
2019. 364(6445): p. 1082–1086. 
65. 
Debanne, D., et al., Paired-pulse facilitation and depression at unitary synapses in rat hippocampus: 
quantal fluctuation affects subsequent release. The Journal of Physiology, 1996. 491(1): p. 163–176. 
 
