 1 Methods  
1.1 Animals  
All animal experiments were approved by the Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences 
Ethics Committee at Tel -Aviv University (01 -19-036, 01 -19-049, 01 -19-051, TAU -MD-IL-
2306 -142-2 and TAU -MD-IL-2306 -141-1). Mice were maintained on a 12 -hour light/12 -hour 
dark cycle (lights on at 08:00) with ad libitum access to standard chow and water. For all in 
vivo recording experiments, mice were individually housed in their home -cages post -surgery 
to prevent damage to the recording apparatus by cage mates. Experiments we re conducted on 
male and female mice aged 3 -5 months at the start of experimental procedures.  
To generate conditional MCU -KO mice, Tg(Trpc4 -cre)383Stl ( a gift of Susumu 
Tonegawa (MIT), MGI: 6114650)1, were crossed with B6;129S -Mcutm1.1Jmol/J (MGI: 
5805708)2. The offspring Trpc4 -cre+/Mcufl/+ were intercrossed to generate experimental Trpc4 -
cre+/Mcufl/fl conditional knockouts (MCU -KO) and Mcufl/fl littermates (Control), all on a ≈ 
50:50 C57BL/6J:129S6/SvEvTac genetic background. Genotypes were confirmed by PCR 
using genomic DNA extracted from tail biopsies. In MCU -KO, Cre expression driven by the 
Trpc4 promoter resulted in deletion of MCU from CA1 pyramidal neurons.  
  
 1.2 Transcriptomics  
To enable nuclear labeling and subsequent RNA sequencing, mice were bilaterally 
injected into the CA1 region of the hippocampus with pAAV1 -EF1A -DIO-mCherry -KASH -
WPRE . Stereotaxic coordinates targeting dorsal CA1 were determined relative to Bregma (in 
mm: 2.15 posterior ; 1.4 lateral,  1.5 dorsal )3. Following injection, a recovery period of 3 –4 
weeks was allowed to ensure optimal viral expression and retrograde/anterograde transport.  To 
isolate the transcriptomes of the MCU -deficient CA1 neurons, hippocampal tissues were 
micro -dissected and a nuclear isolation protocol (such as INTACT or similar) was employed. 
Purified tissue was homogenized in a specialized lysis buffer to liberate intact nuclei while 
preserving the mCherry -KASH signal on the nuclear membrane.  To achieve high -purity cell -
type specif ic enrichment, the suspension of nuclei was processed via Fluorescence -Activated 
Cell Sorting (FACS). Using the mCherry signal, mCherry -positive nuclei (representing the 
CA1 -specific MCU -KO population) were separated from mCherry -negative nuclei (non -Cre 
expressing cells and glia). This step is critical for eliminating "background" RNA from the 
surrounding tissue, ensuring that the resulting sequencing data is specific to the manipulated 
CA1 neurons.  Total RNA was extracted from the FACS -purified mCherry+ n uclei. Library 
preparation was performed using specialized kits for low -input or single -nucleus RNA 
(snRNA -seq). The goal of this analysis is to identify differential gene expression (DGE) 
resulting from the loss of MCU , specifically investigating how mitochondrial calcium 
dysregulation impacts the transcriptional profile of hippocampal CA1 neurons.  
  
 1.3 In vivo  extracellular recordings  
1.3.1 Surgical implants  and procedure  
Tetrodes were constructed from four twisted 17 -μm polyimide -coated platinum -iridium 
(90% –10%) wires (California Fine Wire) and mounted in groups of four into microdrives with 
a single turning screw and no separation between tetrodes. The electrode tips wer e plated with 
platinum to reduce electrode impedances to between 150 –300 kΩ at 1 kHz. A 7 mm guide 
cannula was prepared from a hypodermic stainless -steel tubing (Component Supply #HTX -
26R) and a filler rod (Component Supply #HTX -33R) was placed in the cann ula and removed 
only when needed to prevent clogging of the cannula.  
Mice were anesthetized by continuous isoflurane inhalation and head fixed to a 
stereotaxic apparatus. The animal’s eyes were covered in ointment (Duratears, Vetmarket) and 
body temperature was maintained at 34 ºC by a heating pad (FHC, DC temperature controller). 
Five holes were drilled in the skull: above the right and left cerebellum for ground screws, 
above the left frontal cortex for an EEG screw (1.5 mm anterior, 1.5 mm lateral to bregma), 
and above the righ t dorsal CA1 for the tetrode microdrive (2 mm posterior, 1.5 mm lateral to 
bregma) and for the guide cannula (1 mm posterior, 1.5 mm lateral to bregma). All craniotomies 
were drilled with a 0.7 mm burr except the craniotomy for the guide cannula which was drilled 
with a 0.5 mm burr. The guide cannula was lowered 1.5 mm at an angle of 30º in the sagittal 
plane with the tip pointing in the posterior direction. The microdrive was lowered 600 -800 µm. 
Bipolar stainless -steel electrodes (0.127 mm diameter) were implanted in the cervical muscles 
for EMG recor dings. All implants were secured to the skull with dental cement and to each 
other with light curing glue to reduce the construct weight. A metal bar was secured to the head 
construct for mounting the mice to a head fixating apparatus during stereotaxic in jections4. 
After surgery mice were injected subcutaneously (s.c. ) with 0.125 mg/kg carprofen and 0.05 
mg/kg buprenorphine. Mice were allowed to recover in their home cage for 5 -10 days before 
additional handling or experimentation. During this time the animal’s weight and overall 
wellbeing was monitored daily.   
Following post -operative recovery, the tetrode microdrive was lowered in 25 - to 100 -
μm increments over 24 -h intervals until CA1 stratum pyramidale was reached, typically within 
1-3 weeks. CA1 stratum pyramidale was recognized by (1) the calculated depth of  the implant, 
(2) ripple oscillations during NREM sleep, and (3) a high ratio of RS to FS units (see below). 
The transition from the cortex to the white matter (low spiking activity) and from the white 
matter to CA1 stratum oriens (high FS spiking activity ) served as depth indicators.  
1.3.2 Drug administration  
After reaching CA1 stratum pyramidale with the tetrodes and recording a 24 -hour 
baseline session, mice were implanted subcutaneously with a local drug delivery apparatus 
based on an osmotic pump (Alzet #1007D) connected to vinyl catheter tubing (Durect 
#007760). The catheter terminated with a 5 mm 21 AWG cannula prepared from a hypod ermic 
needle. One day before implantation, the pump, catheter and cannula were preloaded with 0.5 
mM baclofen and primed in saline at 37℃. Six hours after lights -on, under isofl urane 
anesthesia and stereotaxic fixation, mice were shaved and incised for pump insertion. The 
catheter linked the pump’s flow moderator to the 21 AWG cannula, which enveloped the pre -
implanted 26 AWG guide cannula in CA1; both were secured with dental ce ment to prevent 
movement or leakage. Infusion proceeded at 0.5 µ L/hr. Despite priming of the drug delivery 
system – which facilitates pump -tissue equilibration – the delay from pump implantation to 
effective brain exposure ranged from ~1 to 12 h ours (data not shown), likely reflecting the 
buildup of pressure needed to traverse the 26 AWG cannula. Because of this, and to avoid 
potential confounds from the pump implantation/removal procedures, data from the days of 
pump ‘Onset’ and ‘Offset’ were excluded from analys es. 
 1.3.3 Spike sorting and unit c lassification  
Raw extracellular voltage signals were acquired at 20 kHz using an Open Ephys 
acquisition board1 connected to Intan amplifier chips (RHD2132 for tetrode signals, RHD2216 
for EEG/EMG signals). Data was continuously recorded throughout the seven -day experiment, 
with every day at lights on  defining a new recording session. Spike sorting and unit clustering 
was performed independently for every 24 -hour session.  All subsequent analyses were 
performed in MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA) using in -house scripts supported by  
toolboxes including Chronux5, FieldTrip6, and the Buzsaki laboratory repository 
(https://github.com/buzsakilab/buzcode).  
The wideband signal was digitally filtered (300 -6000 Hz bandpass) and decorrelated  
using  a spatial whitening procedure7. Spikes were detected on the whitened data as crossings  
four standard deviations above the background noise level. Timestamps corresponding to the 
peak of each detected event were stored, and waveform snippets (32 samples, centered 
symmetrically around the negative peak) were extracted from the filtered, white ned data for 
subsequent sorting. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was employed to project the high -
dimensional waveform data onto the first few principal components that captured the most 
variance i n waveform shape across channels. Spikes were semi -automatically clustered in this 
feature space using the KlustaKwik algorithm8, which utilizes a masked EM variant of 
Gaussian mixture modeling9. Following automated clustering, all resulting clusters were 
manually inspected and refined using the Klusters software10. This manual curation involved 
merging potentially over -split clusters, splitting under -merged clusters, and removing clusters 
considered noise or multi -unit activity based on visual assessment of waveform shapes, cluster 
separation in feature space, auto - and cross -correlograms, and inter -spike interval (ISI) 
distributions11. Clusters were defined as well -isolated single units and included in further 
analysis only if they fulfilled (1) a refractory period violation  less than 1% of ISI < 2 ms12 and 
(2) an isolation distance > 1013.  
After cluster assignments were finalized, spike times determined during sorting were 
used to re -extract waveforms from the broadband, non -whitened data. These raw waveforms 
were individually aligned to their negative peak, L2 normalized, and detrended to m inimize 
jitter and remove background slow fluctuations. For each cluster, the average waveform was 
upsampled by a factor of 20 using spline interpolation to enhance temporal resolution. The 
following parameters were calculated: (1) Trough -to-Peak Time (TP) , the duration (ms) from 
the main trough of the waveform to the subsequent positive peak, (2) Waveform Asymmetry, 
the difference between the amplitude of the post -trough peak and the pre -trough peak, 
normalized by their sum, and (3) Half -Peak Width, the wi dth (ms) of the trough at half of its 
maximal amplitude. Units exhibiting an inverted average waveform (i.e., where the largest 
absolute deflection was positive) were excluded from further analysis. For the remaining units, 
an initial classification to nar row and wide waveforms was performed based on a TP threshold 
of 0.5 ms. These initial, threshold -based labels served as the starting point for refined 
classification using a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). The GMM was fitted using the three 
waveform paramete rs described above. The result was two sub -populations of units14: Regular 
Spiking (RS), putative pyramidal cells characterized  by wide waveforms , and Fast Spiking 
(FS), putative interneurons, characterized by narrow  waveforms . Only RS units were included 
in subsequent analys es due to a low number of  FS units per animal.  
1.3.4 Vigilance states  
For processing of local field potentials (LFP), broadband neural data were low -pass 
filtered at 450 Hz using an FFT -based sinc convolution to extract the Local Field Potential 
(LFP). The filtered signal was subsequently downsampled to 1250 Hz, satisfying t he Nyquist 
criterion for the frequencies of interest while reducing data size.  An EMG proxy signal was 
derived from 3 -axis accelerometer data recorded concurrently with the electrophysiological 
 signals and processed at 1250 Hz. Raw accelerometer readings were converted to voltage using 
device -specific sensitivity (default: [0.03573; 0.03551; 0.03455] V/g) and zero -g bias values 
(default: [0.49445; 0.48464; 0.51740] V), after removing the DC offse t from each axis. The 
instantaneous magnitude of acceleration was calculated using the L2 norm . This magnitude 
signal served as the input EMG proxy. For behavioral state classification, this signal was high -
pass filtered at 10 Hz (sinc filter). The root me an square (RMS) of the filtered magnitude was 
calculated for each 1 -second epoch, and its logarithm was used as the final EMG feature, 
synchronized with the spectrogram time base.  
Spectrograms for sleep scoring were generated  with the Chronux signal processing toolbox5; 
window size = 5 s, step size = 1 s, tapers [3 5]). Active Wake  (AW) , Quite Wake,  Rapid Eye 
Movement ( REM ) and non -REM (NREM)  sleep were classified in 1 s epochs as previously 
described15. In sum, each recording session was manually scored for at least 1 hr. This data 
was used to standardize the signals prior to classification with the AccuSleep neural network16, 
and to measure the accuracy and precision of classification per  recording. The accuracy and 
precision for AW, NREM, or REM was typically greater than 92% and never below 85%. State 
transitions and artifacts (<3% of recording time) were excluded from further analysis. State 
bouts were merged if separated by less than 4 s and excluded if their duration was less than 10s.  
1.3.5 Sharp -wave ripples  
Sharp -wave ripples (SWRs) were detected from the LFP signal recorded from 
designated hippocampal CA1 channels. Raw LFP data was converted to µV. The LFP was 
bandpass filtered (80-250 Hz)  using a 5th order Butterworth filter, applied forwards and 
backwards to prevent phase distortion. From the filtered signal, t he instantaneous amplitude 
and phase were obtained using the Hilbert transform.  the instantaneous frequency was derived 
by taking the first temporal derivative  of the unwrapped instantaneous phase . A detection signal 
was derived using the Teager Energy Operator (TEO). The TEO  is a discrete non -linear process 
that estimates the energy of a harmonic signal by integrating both amplitude and frequency17. 
For a discrete -time signal 𝑥(𝑛), the TEO is defined as:  
𝛹[𝑥(𝑛)]=𝑥(𝑛)2−𝑥(𝑛−1)·𝑥(𝑛+1) 
Equation 1. Teager Energy Operator.  
To smooth transient discontinuities, the TEO  was convolved with a 15 ms Gaussian 
window . To account for non -stationarity, the smoothed TEO signal was standardized using a 
Z-score transformation . The reference mean and standard deviation (SD) were calculated from  
periods of NREM  sleep  only. Candidate SWR events were initialized when the signal energy 
exceeded 1 SD above baseline. To be included , the event  envelope was required to cross a peak 
threshold of 3.5 SDs and sustain continuous power above 2 SDs for a minimum of 10 ms. 
Events with samples exceeding 200 SDs were classified as non -physiological artifacts and 
discarded. Candidate events shorter than 15 ms or longer than 300 m s were discarded . Events 
occurring within an inter -event interval of less than 20 ms were merged . Because SWRs are 
susceptible to contamination from mechanical and muscular noise, consecutive layers of 
quality assurance were applied. First, e vents with  EMG amplitude  greater  than 2 SDs from the 
NREM  baseline was rejected. Second, a multi -unit gain metric was computed by comparing 
the overall spiking rate during the ripple against control intervals , and e vents without a  positive 
multi -unit spiking gain were discarded . The vetted SWRs  were characterized  as follows . The 
ripple peak was defined as the temporal locus of the trough in the filtered local field potential , 
and the p eak amplitude was extracted directly from the Hilbert envelope.  Other metrices  were 
computed within fixed temporal windows symmetrically oriented around the ripple  peak  to 
mitigate biases due to  heterogeneous lengths . Mean ripple frequency was calculated by 
averaging the instantaneous frequency over a 40  ms window . Peri-event time histograms  of 
firing rates were constructed for each individual unit  by binning s pike times within a 100 ms 
 window . The resulting histograms were averaged across all ripples for each unit and smoothed 
using a Gaussian kernel with a SD of 1 ms. The smoothed histogram s were  z-score standardized 
using control statistics generated from matched control intervals. To measure the timing of 
neuronal recruitment, spike times occurring within a 40  ms window  were converted into 
relative temporal distances. The spike center of mass (CoM ) was defined as the arithmetic 
mean of these relative distances, with negative values indicating advanced recruitment 
preceding the ripple peak, and positive values indicating delayed neuronal participation.  
𝐶𝑜𝑀=1
𝑁∑(𝑡𝑖−𝑡𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘)𝑁
𝑖=1 
Equation 2. Spike Center of Mass During SRWs.  
The spike CoM  was modeled as a function of baseline firing rate and burstiness , and 
marginal effects were generated to determine whether shifts in recruitment timing could be 
attributed to the intrinsic firing patterns of the neurons.   
 
 
 
  
 1.4 Multielectrode array recordings  
1.5 Single -unit firing a nalysis  
1.5.1 Firing rate 
Continuous firing rates were estimated from discrete spike times by sorting events into 
60-second temporal bins. The raw firing rate traces were subsequently denoised using a 
Savitzky -Golay filter, employing a third -order polynomial spanning a 10 -min slidi ng frame. 
For in vivo recordings, statistical analysis was conducted on per -unit, per -day averages, 
excluding days corresponding to the surgical implantation and removal of the osmotic pump. 
For visualization (Fig. 3G), firing rate  trajectories  were aligned to the onset time of the 
pharmacological perturbation, detected algorithmically  per-mouse . For MEA recordings, 
which track individual units across the experiment, firing rates were averaged across specific 
temporal windows. Baseline was defined as 3 hours before perturbation onset. The acute 
response to baclofen was defined as 1 hour starting at perturbation onset. Steady -state was 
defined as 6 hours starting 42 hours after perturbation onset. Units that did not reduce their 
firing rate during the acute response by at least 50% relative to baseline were excluded. For 
stable calculations of loga rithmic ratios, a minimal pseudocount equal to one spike per hour 
was added to all firing rate averages. Firing rate gain was defined as the natural  logarithm of 
the ratio between steady -state and baseline firing rates:  
𝐺𝑎𝑖𝑛=𝑙𝑛([𝑆𝑆]𝐹𝑅
[𝐵𝑆𝐿]𝐹𝑅) 
As a response variable in LME models, firing rates were modeled with a gamma 
distribution in the in vivo dataset , or log-transformed and modeled with a normal distribution 
in the MEA dataset . In MEA , firing rates as a continuous  predictor were log -transformed prior 
to analysis. These decisions  were guided by goodness -of-fit criteria and the skewness of the 
firing rate di stribution.  For visualization, per-unit firing rates are presented on logarithmic 
scales in both datasets.  
1.5.2 Firing pattern  
Single -unit burst firing was analyzed as discrete event s using  the maximum interval 
algorithm18. A candidate burst is initiated when two consecutive spikes occur with an inter -
spike interval below a predefined onset threshold. The burst is extended to include subsequent 
contiguous spikes provided each sequential interval remains below a termination threshold. If 
the inter -burst interval separating two proximal events is less than a minimum separation 
threshold, the events are merged. Finally, candidate bursts must meet a minimum spike count 
to be retained. The temporal parameters for burst detection were tailored to the physiological 
properties of the two experimental preparations. In freely moving mice, CA1 pyramidal cells 
fire complex spike bursts at high frequencies19, and the detection criteria included an onset 
threshold of 6 ms, a termination threshold of 12 ms, a minimum inter -burst interval of 12 ms, 
and a minimum of 2 spikes per burst. For dissociated hippocampal networks on MEA, the 
detection criteria included a  50 ms onset threshold, a 100 ms termination threshold, a 200 ms 
minimum inter -burst interval, and a minimum of 3 spikes per burst. This wider temporal 
integration in vitro was selected to limit the percentage of non -bursting units at baseline and 
prevent artifactual zero-inflation (Fig. S5A).  
For each unit, burstiness was quantified as the probability of a spike participating in a 
burst event, denoted as 𝑃𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡 . This metric allowed partitioning the total firing rate into two 
complementary, additive components representing the rate of spikes involved in bursts, 
𝐹𝑅𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡 , and the rate of isolated single spikes, 𝐹𝑅𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 , as: 
 𝐹𝑅𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙=𝑃𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡⋅𝐹𝑅𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 ⏟          
𝐹𝑅𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡+(1−𝑃𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡)⋅𝐹𝑅𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 ⏟              
𝐹𝑅𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 
To analyze the temporal dynamics of firing rate components (Fig. 4A) , discrete burst 
and single -spike events were transformed into continuous kinetic state estimates. 
Asynchronous event timestamps were synchronized onto a standardized temporal grid by 
calculating continuous probability densities using 120 s Gaussian kernel . An edge correction 
normalization vector was applied to counteract boundary approximation artifacts. When a unit 
did not burst for a consecutive period exceeding the 95th percentile of it s baseline inter -burst 
interval distribution, its continuous temporal measurement was masked as mathematically 
undefined. This prevents the projection of active bursting properties during periods of 
prolonged silence.  
Since burstiness and firing rate are strongly correlated independently of detection 
parameters (Fig. S5C), all LME models containing burstiness also included total firing rate as 
a covariate. This approach partials out rate -driven variance to strictly evaluate differences in 
firing patterns.  Since burstiness  is a probability  and its distribution is left -skewed , as a response 
variable it was modeled with a normal distribution after logit transformation  was applied . To 
robustly handle boundary values20, the data was first compressed  to an open interval  using the 
sample size , 𝑁, of all units  in the analysis :  
𝑝′=𝑝(𝑁−1)+0.5
𝑁 
To investigate the relationship between initial firing patterns and homeostatic recovery  
(Fig. 4E) , neurons were stratified into three subpopulations (low, intermediate, and high) based 
on their baseline burstiness. The boundaries of stratification were defined using quadratically 
spaced percentiles to accurately isolate the subgroup of heavily bursting neurons.  
To systematically confirm our conclusions are independent of burst detection criteria, 
a multidimensional parameter sweep was performed on the MEA dataset using onset thresholds 
between 10 and 50 ms alongside minimum spike counts from 3 to 5. In addition, primary in 
vivo observations were independently validated using the broader in vitro burst detection 
criteria and a distinct stochastic approach evaluating single -unit autocorrelograms. 
Specifically, a Burst Index was calculated as the ratio between the me an spike rate within a 3 –
5 ms post -spike window against the mean rate within a 200 –300 ms baseline window21. A data -
driven pseudocount, calculated as half the minimum non -zero firing rate observed across all 
neurons within the relevant window, was added to the numerator and denominator to prevent 
mathematical instability:  
𝐵𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥=1
Δ𝑇1⋅∑(𝐴𝐶𝐺𝑡)5
𝑡=3+𝑐
1
Δ𝑇2⋅∑(𝐴𝐶𝐺𝑡)300
𝑡=200 +𝑐 
1.6 Statistical analysis  
To account for the hierarchical structure of the data, such as repeated measurements 
within individual mice or multiple single units from the same culture, statistical analyses were 
conducted using Linear Mixed -Effects (LME) models, implemented via MATLAB' s fitlme  
function and estimated using Restricted Maximum Likelihood (REML), or Generalized Linear 
Mixed -Effects (GLME), implemented via MATLAB's fitglme  function and estimated using 
Restricted Maximum Pseudo Likelihood (REMPL). The selection between these model types 
was strictly determined by the distribution of the response variable in question. This approach 
models the non -independence of observations by partitioning variance into fixed effects, 
representing population -level influences, and random effect s, capturing subject -specific 
 variability. Random effects were defined in the model formula, typically including random 
intercepts for each experiment (e.g., mouse). When relevant, different random effect structures 
were compared. Specifically, models with random slopes such as (Day | Mouse) were 
considered and selected based on the lowest Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). Fixed 
effects included categorical predictors such as genotype  (e.g., Control vs. MCU -KO) and 
experimental phase  (e.g., Baseline, Steady -State ), and continuous predictors such as baseline 
firing rate and burstiness. Continuous predictors were  standardized by  z-scoring across all data 
points in the model  to facilitate comparison of coefficients regardless of the ir original units ,. 
Two exceptions were the state-space (Fig 4D and Fig S3C) and causal mediation analys es (Fig 
S4C-F).  
The chosen regression model was subject to further analysis. An F -test for the highest -
order interaction terms was extracted from an ANOVA table. Model coefficients, representing 
specific comparisons relative to reference levels (e.g., Control group or Baseline day), were 
evaluated using t -tests. When significant interactions were found, or for specific a priori 
compa risons, post -hoc contrasts representing simple effects (effect of one factor at specific 
levels of another) or marginal effects (effect of one  factor averaged across levels of another) 
were computed. To control for multiple comparisons arising from these derived contrasts, p -
values were adjusted using the Holm -Bonferroni method.  
For datasets that do not have a nested structure, such as  slice electrophysiology and 
behavioral  assays , conventional statistical tests were employed. The selection between 
parametric (e.g., ANOVA, t -test) and non -parametric (e.g., Mann -Whitney U test) methods for 
these analyses was determined after assessing for assumptions of data normality and 
homogeneit y of variance . 
No statistical methods were used to pre -determine sample sizes; however, sample sizes 
are comparable to those reported in relevant previous publications22. Data collection and 
subsequent analyses were not performed blind to the experimental conditions.  In all figures, 
statistical significance is indicated as follows: *p < 0.05 ; **p <0.01 ; ***p < 0.001 ; ****p < 
0.0001 ; ns, not significant.  Unless otherwise stated, error bars represent mean ± SEM.  For 
baseline -normalized  firing rate trajectories, error bars represent geometric mean ± SEM.  
1.6.1 Marginal Effects  
To visualize the isolated influence of specific predictors on response variables, 
marginal effects were estimated  from the predicted population -level response  (least square s 
means) . A synthetic grid was generated by varying the independent variable of interest across 
its observed empirical range. Other continuous covariates were held constant at their mean 
values , and  categorical covariates were held constant at their mode. Population -level 
predictions and their 95% confidence intervals were computed across this synthetic space. 
Subject -specific random effects were set to zero .  
1.6.2 Partial Regression  
To evaluate the coupling between single -spike and burst -spike firing gain independent 
of baseline activity, a partial regression analysis was conducted. A n LME  model was 
constructed to predict single -spike firing gain from burst -spike firing gain, baseline firing rate, 
baseline burst probability, and experimental genotype. A two -way interaction between 
genotype and each continuous predictor was included . Single -spike and burst -spike gain were 
independently regressed against the baseline covariates and genotype to extract their respective 
residuals. These response and predictor residuals, representing the variance unexplained by the 
initial baseline conditio ns, were plotted against one another in an added variable plot. The slope 
of the linear fit through these residuals visually corresponds to the partial regression coefficient 
of each genotype . 
  
 
 
ou need the standardized models calculated separately per group to evaluate the relative 
effect sizes of the pathways within each specific network. Standardizing allows you to directly 
compare the weight of the direct negative effect against the indirect p ositive effect within the 
knockout neurons, leading to your conclusion that the net total effect shifts to negative.  
 
However, you cannot use those separate standardized models to test if the two 
genotypes are statistically different from one another. Standardizing within groups forces their 
individual variances to unity, masking the true physical scale differences betwee n the control 
and knockout networks. Therefore, you must construct a combined unstandardized model that 
includes a genotype interaction term to test whether the absolute biological slopes differ 
between the groups. This unstandardized interaction yields th e definitive p -value proving that 
the genetic deletion significantly altered the prognostic value of burstiness.    
 2 References  
1. Okuyama, T., Kitamura, T., Roy, D.S., Itohara, S. & Tonegawa, S. Ventral CA1 
neurons store social memory. Science  353, 1536 –1541 (2016).  
2. Kwong, J.Q.  et al.  The Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter Selectively Matches 
Metabolic Output to Acute Contractile Stress in the Heart. Cell Reports  12, 15–22 
(2015).  
3. Paxinos, G. & Franklin, K.B.J. The Mouse Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates , 148 (Gulf 
Professional Publishing, 2004).  
4. Heim, L.R., Shoob, S., de Marcas, L., Zarhin, D. & Slutsky, I. Measuring synaptic 
transmission and plasticity with fEPSP recordings in behaving mice. STAR Protocols  
3, 101115 (2022).  
5. Bokil, H., Andrews, P., Kulkarni, J.E., Mehta, S. & Mitra, P. Chronux: A Platform for 
Analyzing Neural Signals. Journal of neuroscience methods  192, 146 –151 (2010).  
6. Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E. & Schoffelen, J. -M. FieldTrip: Open Source 
Software for Advanced Analysis of MEG, EEG, and Invasive Electrophysiological 
Data. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience  2011 , 156869 (2011).  
7. Pachitariu, M., Steinmetz, N.A., Kadir, S.N., Carandini, M. & Harris, K.D. Fast and 
accurate spike sorting of high -channel count probes with KiloSort. Vol. 29 (Curran 
Associates, Inc., 2016).  
8. Kadir, S.N., Goodman, D.F.M. & Harris, K.D. High -Dimensional Cluster Analysis 
with the Masked EM Algorithm. Neural Computation  26, 2379 –2394 (2014).  
9. Harris, K.D., Henze, D.A., Csicsvari, J., Hirase, H. & Buzsáki, G. Accuracy of Tetrode 
Spike Separation as Determined by Simultaneous Intracellular and Extracellular 
Measurements. Journal of Neurophysiology  84, 401 –414 (2000).  
10. Hazan, L., Zugaro, M. & Buzsáki, G. Klusters, NeuroScope, NDManager: A free 
software suite for neurophysiological data processing and visualization. Journal of 
Neuroscience Methods  155, 207 –216 (2006).  
11. Hill, D.N., Mehta, S.B. & Kleinfeld, D. Quality Metrics to Accompany Spike Sorting 
of Extracellular Signals. Journal of Neuroscience  31, 8699 –8705 (2011).  
12. Middleton, S.J.  et al.  Altered hippocampal replay is associated with memory 
impairment in mice heterozygous for the Scn2a gene. Nature Neuroscience  21, 996 –
1003 (2018).  
13. Tanaka, K.Z.  et al.  The hippocampal engram maps experience but not place. Science  
361, 392 –397 (2018).  
14. McCormick, D.A., Connors, B.W., Lighthall, J.W. & Prince, D.A. Comparative 
electrophysiology of pyramidal and sparsely spiny stellate neurons of the neocortex. 
Journal of Neurophysiology  54, 782 –806 (1985).  
15. Zarhin, D.  et al.  Disrupted neural correlates of anesthesia and sleep reveal early circuit 
dysfunctions in Alzheimer models. Cell Reports  38(2022).  
16. Barger, Z., Frye, C.G., Liu, D., Dan, Y. & Bouchard, K.E. Robust, automated sleep 
scoring by a compact neural network with distributional shift correction. PLOS ONE  
14, e0224642 (2019).  
17. Kaiser, J.F. On a simple algorithm to calculate the 'energy' of a signal. in International 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing 381–384 vol.1 (1990).  
 18. Cotterill, E., Charlesworth, P., Thomas, C.W., Paulsen, O. & Eglen, S.J. A comparison 
of computational methods for detecting bursts in neuronal spike trains and their 
application to human stem cell -derived neuronal networks. Journal of Neurophysiology  
116, 306 –321 (2016).  
19. Ranck, J.B. Studies on single neurons in dorsal hippocampal formation and septum in 
unrestrained rats: Part I. Behavioral correlates and firing repertoires. Experimental 
Neurology  41, 462 –531 (1973).  
20. Smithson, M. & Verkuilen, J. A better lemon squeezer? Maximum -likelihood 
regression with beta -distributed dependent variables. Psychological Methods  11, 54–
71 (2006).  
21. Royer, S.  et al.  Control of timing, rate and bursts of hippocampal place cells by 
dendritic and somatic inhibition. Nature Neuroscience  15, 769 –775 (2012).  
22. Hayat, H.  et al.  Reduced neural feedback signaling despite robust neuron and gamma 
auditory responses during human sleep. Nature Neuroscience  25, 935 –943 (2022).  
 