 The Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter Couples 
Hippocampal Burst  Firing with Homeostatic  Plasticity  
 
1 Introduction  
Mitochondria  participate in diverse physiological processes through their handling of 
intracellular Ca2+ (1–3). The primary route of mitochondrial Ca²⁺ (mitoCa2+) influx is the 
mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU)  (4, 5). MCU  is indispensable for mitoCa2+ influx 
under  evoked , high stimulation conditions  (4–26). Importantly,  there are no compensatory 
alternatives for  evoked mitoCa2+ uptake , which is equally impaired by acute and chronic 
perturbations to MCU.  Notwithstanding , MCU is highly conserved across all animals (27, 28), 
while MCU homologs have been identified in nearly all plants and metazoa (29–31). Given  its 
singular function and ubiquitous expression, one of the most surprising findings of the 
molecular era (30) is that MCU knockout (MCU -KO) typically results in remarkably mild 
phenotypes. Most organisms or tissues lacking MCU exhibit no gross pathology or dysfunction  
(6, 10, 12, 32–34), which  poses an ‘evolutionary paradox’ (30) – Why is MCU deeply 
conserved if its absence is well -tolerated?  
A potential answer  emerges  when perturbing MCU and subsequently challenging the 
system beyond its resting state . Under these circumstances , the functional impairments that 
occur collectively suggest a fundamental role of MCU in adaptation; enabling  cells, tissues, 
and organisms to effectively cope with  various forms of physiological stress  (10, 12, 15, 31–
37). MCU -KO in Caenorhabditis elegans  leads to impaired epidermal wound healing (32), in 
zebrafish  to greater incidence of sinoatrial arrest (33), in Drosophila  to shortened lifespan (10), 
in Arabidopsis thaliana  to reduced root length under low -nutrient conditions (31), and in mice 
to a diminished capacity for sustained physical exercise (12, 34). This pattern is further 
solidified through murine cell-type conditional MCU -KO, which in the heart leads to blunted 
cardiac output in response to adrenergic stimulation (35), in skeletal muscle to diminished 
sprint performance (37), in pancreatic beta -cells to impaired glucose -stimulated insulin 
secretion (15), in the liver to exacerbated steatosis under high -fat diet conditions (36) and in 
the brain  to impairments in  short - and long -term synaptic plasticity (11, 17–20, 22, 24, 38–43).  
The brain has adaptive needs beyon d synaptic plasticity . To balance the continuous 
barrage of stimuli and plastic events without succumbing to hyper - or hypo -activity , neuronal 
networks rely heavily on homeostatic regulation  (44). Homeostasis refers to the processes that 
stabilize  key physiological variables  within a healthy  and functional range  (45). Firing rates 
are homeostatically regulated (46–51), and the clinical importance of firing rate homeostasis 
(FRH)  is increasingly evident  (51–54). Still, the molecular sensors that track deviations in 
firing remain elusive.  One possible candidate is MCU (47, 55). Due to its activation kinetics, 
MCU preferentially responds to high-frequency burst  firing (41, 47, 56–58). Neuronal burst s 
are a privileged mode of communication, essential for reliable synaptic transmission, the 
induction of synaptic plasticity, and the encoding of memories (59). The selectivity of MCU 
for burst firing and its position within the interconnected mitochondrial network  allows  
mitoCa2+ influx  to integrate salient activity across time and space,  offering a robust 
representation of recent cellular history.  
To test the functional relationships between MCU, burst -firing, and FRH, we performed 
a multi -level investigation of conditional MCU -KO in the mouse hippocampus, including long -
term electrophysiological recordings alongside continuous pharmacological pertu rbations. 
Ultimately, we offer a new perspective on the evolutionary paradox of MCU by establishing 
its role in converting high-intensity signals  into long -lasting adaptive responses , in particular 
homeostatic plasticity .    2 Results  
We generated mice with targeted deletion of MCU  in excitatory CA1 neurons  and 
confirmed reduced MCU mRNA expression (Figure 1Error! Reference source not 
found. A,B). As expected, Ca2+ imaging in cultured hippocampal neurons  revealed  a deficit in  
mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake of MCU -KO neurons, evoked  by high frequency trains of action 
potentials  (Figure 1C). Evoked c ytosolic Ca2+ transients remained indistinguishable from 
control  (Figure 1Error! Reference source not found. D). We then shifted our focus to calcium 
dynamics during  spontaneous neuronal activity  (Figure 1E,I). Surprisingly, the Ca2+ transients 
of MCU -KO neurons were fully preserved  in the mitochondrial compartment  (Figure 1F-H), 
yet larger and more frequent in the cytosolic compartment  (Figure 1J-L). Thus, while MCU is 
strictly required for rapid calcium uptake during intense stimulation, it can be compensated for 
during resting states by alternative, possibly slower pathways (8, 60–63). The compensation, 
however, involves enhanced cytosolic drive .  
To determine if the compensatory cytosolic drive in MCU -KO stems from a 
reconfiguration of baseline firing, we performed MEA recordings in cultured hippocampal 
neurons. While overall firing rates remained indistinguishable from controls, MCU -KO 
neurons exhi bited significantly higher burstiness, defined as the probability of spikes occurring 
within bursts (Figure 2A). The same functional reorganization was observed in vivo . 
Extracellular tetrode recordings of regular spiking, putative pyramidal cells in CA1 of freely 
moving mice (Supp. Figure 1) revealed a shift from tonic towards phasic firing in  MCU -KO 
neurons , with preservation of overall firing rates  (Figure 2B).  
Given burst firing of pyramidal cells is strongly associated with sharp -wave ripples 
(SWRs ; (64)), we hypothesized that the elevated intrinsic burstiness of MCU -KO neurons 
would distort these network oscillations. Indeed, SWR in MCU -KO mice had an increased 
peak amplitude  (Figure 2C), possessed a faster internal frequency (Figure 2D), and were 
significantly shorter in duration  (Figure 2E). Furthermore, per-unit analysis of firing during 
SWRs  revealed advanced timing of spikes in MCU -KO neurons; their spike center of mass 
relative to the SWR peak  shifted toward s earlier, negative time lags compared  to control 
(Figure 2F,G).  To determine whether this advanced recruitment is directly linked to the 
transition towards phasic firing , we modeled the spike center of mass as a function of baseline 
burstiness  and firing rate . Earlier spiking during ripples  was positively correlated with  
burstiness ( Figure 2G), while firing rate had no significant effect ( Supp. Figure 2). This 
relationship was conserved across genotypes , as interactions were tested and found non -
significant (data not shown).  These observations suggest that the loss of MCU triggers a shift 
toward phasic firing  that distorts the temporal dynamics of synchroni zed network events , 
particularly SWRs  (65). 
Next, we examined the role of MCU in the canonical CA3 -CA1 Schaffer collateral 
pathway  using field excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) recordings  in acute hippocampal 
slices  (Figure 3A). Basal synaptic transmission , measured as the  fEPSP  slope relative to  the 
presynaptic fiber volley amplitude , was enhanced in MCU -KO slices  (Figure 3B). In addition, 
MCU -KO slices exhibited reduced short -term synaptic plasticity , evident by a significantly 
lower paired -pulse ratio (Figure 3C), and impaired long-term potentiation following theta -burst 
stimulation  (Figure 3D). These findings indicate an increase in release probability (66) and 
total excitatory drive to CA1 , which likely contribute s to the enhanced baseline burstiness and 
cytosolic Ca2+ transients observed in MCU -KO neurons .  
Having established the baseline phenotype of MCU deletion in CA1, we next asked how 
this altered network copes with prolonged functional stress . To test the capacity for FRH  in the 
intact brain,  we continuously deliver ed the GABA B receptor agonist baclofen via osmotic 
pumps  directed at CA1 ( Figure 3E). While b aclofen suppressed the firing rate s of both control 
and MCU -KO neurons  initially, their recovery trajectories gradually diverged  (Figure 3F).  Control mice successfully engaged homeostatic mechanisms, recovering steady -state firing 
rates back to baseline levels  by the third day of the perturbation ( Figure 3G). In contrast, MCU -
KO firing rates remain ed significantly depressed throughout the entire perturbation  (Figure 
3G).  
While all MCU -KO animals failed to recover their firing rates, we observed significant 
heterogeneity between individual animals and hypothesized that the initial state of the network 
predicts its capacity for FRH. Baseline mean firing rate, averaged across  units per animal, did 
not predict recovery for either genotype  (Figure 3H). In contrast, high average burstiness at 
baseline predicted robust recovery in control, but not MCU -KO mice (Figure 3I). These 
findings imply that at the network level, a preference towards phasic firing is associated with 
homeostatic resilience in a manner dependent on MCU.  
Interestingly, while control neurons exhibited equal burstiness at baseline and steady -
state, the homeostatic challenge with baclofen altered the firing pattern of MCU -KO neurons 
and collapsed their compensatory state of elevated burstiness ( Figure 3J). However, these in 
vivo findings reflect  population distributions  since  individual  unit identities  could not be 
maintained  throughout th e recording  period . To investigate  if burstiness also carries prognostic 
meaning  for homeostatic recovery at the single -cell level, and better understand why this 
relationship fails in MCU -KO, we replicated the homeostatic experiment in vitro  using MEA 
recordings , which allow tracking the same units over days with a high level of certainty.   
Over the course of two days with baclofen, MCU -KO cultures  exhibited significantly 
impaired FRH compared to controls  (Supp. Figure X) , confirming a deficit in homeostatic 
plasticity that is intrinsic  to the hippocampal network . This complements our previous work 
showing that overexpressing the MCU complex rescue s both burst -evoked mitoCa2+ transients 
and FRH in neurons lacking the Insulin -like Growth Factor -1 Receptor (IGF -1R), an upstream 
promoter of MCU (47). Paired with the genetic ablation presented here, these results forge a 
definitive causal link between MCU -mediated mitoCa2+ signaling and the homeostatic 
response to baclofen.  
Next, we dissected per -unit firing rates into two components: single -spike firing and 
burst -spike firin g. During the baclofen perturbation, b oth firing modes followed similar 
trajectories over time within each genotype s (Figure 4A). Single -spike and burst -spike firing 
gradual ly recover ed in control s but were persistently suppressed in MCU -KO networks . This 
parallel behavior, where the two components rise and fall together, prompted us to ask whether 
homeostatic mechanisms merely scale activity irrespective of its pattern, or if there exists a  
coordinated exchange rate between tonic and phasic firing . 
To visualize  how these components are co -modulated  during FRH , we plotted  the 
absolute difference from steady -state to baseline  in single -spike firing versus  burst -spike firing  
and fitted the data using orthogonal regression  (Figure 4B). In Control neurons, variance was 
distributed across both axes, demonstrating a tightly coupled modulation where absolute 
changes in burst firing are accompanied by similar abs olute changes in single -spike firing . In 
contrast, the variance in firing rate recovery of MCU -KO neurons was almost entirely restricted 
to the burst -firing axis . This apparent breakdown in coordination raised a critical question: does 
the absence of MCU sever the coupling between these two firing modes, or does the coupling  
exist but fail to successfully execute?  
To answer this question, w e tran sitioned from the absolute to the relative domain. First, 
we normalized each unit to its own pre -perturbation baseline, and examined the temporal 
evolution of single -spike and burst -spike firing throughout the perturbation  (Figure 4C). This 
relative perspective revealed temporal dynamics that were markedly different from the parallel 
trajectories initially observed in the raw population averages ( Figure 4A). Rather than simply 
rising and falling in tandem, the normalized trajectories exposed a strategic divergence during  the homeostatic response. Burst-spike firing of control  neurons overshot baseline levels , 
presumably  to compensate for a recovering, yet slightly suppressed, single -spike rate.  
To formalize this apparent relationship, w e analyzed the state -space trajectories of single - 
and burst -spike firing gain, where gain is calculated as the log -fold ratio between  steady -state 
and baseline  (Figure 4D). Remarkably, both genotypes obeyed a conserved , statistically 
identical,  power -law scaling . For every 10% change in burst -firing during the perturbation , 
control and MCU -KO neurons  exhibited a 4.3% and 3.9% change in single -spike firing, 
respectively. To ensure that the power -law scaling between burst and single -spike recovery is 
not a byproduct of  differences in baseline activity, we implemented a partial regression 
analysis. Even after regressing out baseline firing rate and burstiness, the proportional 
allocation of spikes during FRH persisted  (Supp. Figure 3C). Moreover , evaluating the log -
fold gain of aggregate mean rates per animal in vivo  revealed  a similar  positive scaling 
relationship between burst -spike and single -spike recovery  (Supp. Figure 3D). Together, these 
results imply that baclofen -induced f iring rate homeostasis involves  coordinated plasticity  of 
tonic and phasic firing , both in vitro  at the single -cell level  and in vivo  at the network  level . 
Importantly, MCU -KO neurons follow the same power -low governing the exchange of burst - 
and single -spikes  as control neurons , but they fail to execute it.  
The discovery of a conserved power -law scaling in the relative domain resolves the 
apparent decoupling observed in absolute firing rates. Because the allocation of burst - and 
single -spikes  operates proportionally, the divergence between genotypes i n the absolute 
domain is a mathematical consequence of the burst -dominant baseline  in MCU -KO neurons 
relative to control neurons . Applying any proportional modulation to this baseline during a 
homeostatic challenge will naturally force a greater  absolute change in burst spikes compared 
to single spikes  (Supp. Note 1) . However, while this geometric relationship explains how the 
spike deficit is allocat ed, it does not explain the deficit itself. The conserved power -law dictates 
how burst and single spikes scale together, yet it does not guarantee that the network will 
generate enough overall activity to restore  homeostasis. Thus, we shifted our focus from the 
plastic adaptation  of firing patterns during FRH , to the biological capacity for executi ng 
homeos tasis itself. Specifically, we hypothesized that  the homeostatic deficit  caused by  MCU 
deletion is directly linke d to the compensatory  increase in phasi c firing.  
To visualize how the initial network state influences a neuron's capacity for recovery, we 
stratified units into subgroups based on their baseline burst probability and tracked their 
normalized firing dynamics throughout the homeostatic challenge  (Figure 4E). In Control 
networks, a clear prognostic hierarchy emerged: neurons entering the perturbation with a higher 
baseline burstiness mounted the most rapid and robust homeostatic rebound. Conversely, 
control neurons with low baseline burstiness exhibited a much more sluggish and incomplete 
recovery. This prognostic hierarchy appeared completely inverted in MCU -KO networks, 
where neurons exhibiting the highest initial burstiness suffered the most profound firing rate 
depression.  
To statistically quantify this relationship and disentangle the volume of activity from its 
temporal pattern, we modeled steady -state firing as a function of baseline firing rate and burst 
probability, extracting the marginal effect for each metric. Baseli ne firing rate served as a 
consistent positive predictor of absolute steady -state activity, exhibiting no significant 
interaction with genotype ( Supp. Figure 4A). Neurons that were more active initially simply 
remained more active after the perturbation. In stark contrast, the marginal effect of baseline 
burstiness exhibited profound interaction s with genotype ( Supp. Figure 4B). In Control 
networks, higher baseline burstiness independently predicted robust recovery of single -spike, 
burst -spike, and total firing rates. In MCU -KO networks, th ese prognostic relationship s were 
significantly impaired, and even inverted for single -spike recovery . MCU -KO neurons with the 
highest initial burst probability exhibited the most severe collapse in tonic firing .  While margin al effects successfully isolate the prognostic relationship  of baseline 
burst iness  from the that of firing rate , they treat the  recovery of single and burst spikes as 
indepe ndent  outcomes.  However, our state -space analysis demonstrated that these two firing 
modes are coupled by a conserved allocation power -law. This interdependence raises a critical 
mechanistic question: does the compensatory burstiness of MCU -KO neurons directly suppress 
their capacity to recover tonic firing, or does the baseline state primarily suppress the recovery 
of phasic fir ing, which subsequently drags down tonic firing  through their obligatory coupling? 
To formally distinguish between a direct suppressive effect of the baseline state and an indirect 
effect mediated by the allocation power -law, we performed a causal mediation analysis 
evaluating the relationship between baseline burstiness , steady -state single -spike firing , and 
steady -state burst -spike firing ( Figure 4F and Supp. Figure 4C-F). In both genotypes, baseline 
burstiness exhibited a negative direct effect on single -spike firing and a positive indirect effect 
mediated by burst -spike  firing . However,  the negative  direct effect was twice as strong in 
MCU -KO neurons , effectively  outweighing the positive indirect effect. Consequently, the net 
total effect of baseline burstiness shifted from positive in controls to negative in MCU -KO 
neurons, resulting in a failure to recover tonic firing levels.  
To definitively quantify the prognostic value of burst - versus single -spike firing , we 
performed a feature ablation analysis using k -fold cross -validation, evaluating the unique out -
of-sample variance in steady -state firing explained by each baseline firing component ( Figure 
4G). Consistent with the privileged role of bursting in driving network plasticity, baseline 
burst -spike firing contributed significantly more unique prognostic information than single -
spike firing across both genotypes. However, the predictive power of burst -spike firing  was 
significantly degraded in MCU -KO networks compared to Controls. Overall, these findings  
establish  phasic firing as a primary feature dictating a neuron's homeostatic resilience . 
However, they also reveal that the compensatory shift toward extreme burstiness adopted by 
MCU -KO networks is profoundly maladaptive; rather than promoting resilience, this altered 
baseline state suppresse s the recovery of tonic firing  and compromis es the adaptive infor mation 
carried by phasic firing.  
To ensure that these physiological conclusions were independent  of a specific analytical 
approach, we confirmed our findings hold across a wide range of burst detection parameters  
(Supp. Figure 5). A comprehensive parameter sweep of varying inter -spike interval (ISI) 
thresholds and minimum spike counts demonstrated  that the unique prognostic value of 
baseline burst -spike firing remains remarkably stable regardless of the specific criteria used to 
define a burst. Furthermore, replicating our in vivo analyses using an autocorrelogram -derived 
Burst Index or applying the MEA dataset criteria  yielded the exact same homeostatic allocation 
rules and prognostic relationships . 
Our physiological findings present  a complex picture regarding  the impact of MCU 
deletion. On the one hand, MCU -KO exhibited profound impairments in synaptic and 
homeostatic plasticity, as well as significantly shorte r SWR s – a feature directly link ed to 
working memory impairments (65). On the other hand, baseline firing rates remained 
remarkably stable, supported by a highly burst -dominant state. To resolve whether this altered  
baseline state was sufficient to support complex behaviors, or if the underlying loss of plasticity 
and long-duration SWRs would prove dominant, we subjected MCU -KO mice and their 
littermate controls to a battery of hippocampus -dependent memory tasks . To ensure a clear 
interpretation of these cognitive assays, we first confirmed that the mice did not exhibit baseline 
differences in locomotor activity or anxiety -like behaviors that could otherwise confound 
performance  (Supp. Figure 6).  
In the novel object recognition task, control mice showed a robust preference for 
exploring a novel object over a familiar one, whereas MCU -KO mice explored both objects 
equally, indicating a failure to form or retrieve the memory of the familiar object ( Figure 5A,B).  A similar impairment emerged  in a social recognition paradigm, where MCU -KO mice failed 
to preferentially investigate a novel mouse over a familiar one ( Figure 5C,D). These m emory 
deficit s also extended to associative learning . In a contextual fear conditioning task, MCU -KO 
mice displayed significantly less freezing behavior when re-exposed to an arena associated 
with an electric shock , demonstrating impaired memory of the fearful environment  (Figure 5E-
G). Crucially, these mnemonic impairments were specific to tasks reliant on the hippocampus. 
When tested in a n auditory cued fear conditioning paradigm  – where memory for a tone does 
not depend on hippocampal integrity  – MCU -KO mice showed freezing levels that were 
indistinguishable from controls  (Figure 5H-J). Together, the se cognitive  deficits demonstrate 
that MCU -mediated Ca2+ signaling is indispensable for the neural computations involved in 
hippocampal -dependent memory . 
 
 
   3 Figures  
 
 
Figure 1. Elevated  cytosolic Ca2+ transients  compensate s for MCU -mediated influx  during 
baseline activity.  
(A) Quantification of MCU mRNA expression levels in the hippocampus of Control and MCU -KO 
mice, expressed as a percentage relative to control levels. Individual data points represent mice (n 
= 6). The genetic knockout resulted in significantly lower MCU mRNA e xpression (p = 0.002).  
(B) Representative image of a neuron expressing mtGCaMP8m -jRGeCO1a  
(C) Peak mitochondrial Ca2+ responses (mitoCa2+, ΔF/F) in Control (n = 36) and MCU -KO (n = 29) 
neurons evoked by trains of 1, 3, 5, and 10 stimuli  at 50 Hz. Mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake was 
significantly reduced in MCU -KO neurons compared to Controls at 3, 5, and 10 stimuli  (p < 0.001).  
Right panel shows representative traces of mitoCa2+  responses in a Control ( top) and MCU -KO 
(bottom ) neuron.  
(D) Peak cytosolic Ca2+ responses (cytoCa2+, ΔF/F) in Control (n = 32) and MCU -KO (n = 45) 
neurons evoked by trains of 1, 3, 5, and 10 stimuli  at 50 Hz. No significant difference between 
genotypes was observed  (p = 0.78).  Right panel shows representative traces of cyto Ca2+  responses 
in a Control ( top) and MCU -KO ( bottom ) neuron.  
(E) Representative traces of spontaneous mitochondrial Ca2+ transients in Control and MCU -KO 
neurons.  
 (F) Peak amplitude (ΔF/F) of spontaneous mitochondrial Ca2+ transients was not significantly different 
between Control (n = NN) and MCU -KO (n = NN) neurons (p = PP).  
(G) Average rate (Hz) of spontaneous mitochondrial Ca2+ transients  was not significantly altered by 
MCU deletion (p = PP).  
(H) Total mitochondrial Ca2+ flux, calculated as the integrated area under the curve for spontaneous 
events, was not altered by MCU deletion (p = PP).  
(I) Representative traces of spontaneous cytosolic Ca2+ transients in Control and MCU -KO neurons.  
(J) Peak amplitude (ΔF/F) of spontaneous cytosolic Ca2+ transients was significantly elevated in 
MCU -KO (n = NN) relative to Control (n = NN) neurons (p = PP).  
(K) Average rate (Hz) of spontaneous cytosolic Ca2+ transients  was significantly elevated in the 
absence of MCU (p = PP).  
(L) Total cytosolic Ca2+ accumulation was significantly elevated in the absence of MCU (p = 0.005).  
Panel (A , F-H, J-L) analyzed using the Mann -Whitney test. Panels ( C,D) analyzed using two -way RM 
ANOVA with Sidak's multiple comparisons test.  
 
    
Figure 2. MCU -KO increases burstiness and alters sharp -wave ripple properties.  
(A) Firing rate  (Hz) and burstiness (P burst; logit -transformed)  of Control (black) and MCU -KO (gold) 
neurons  during spontaneous baseline activity . Recordings from MEA in hippocampal cultures (top 
left schematic).  Marginal histograms display the distribution for each axis, with dashed lines 
indicating group means.  Whereas  firing rate does not differ significantly between groups (p = 0.7 5), 
burst probability is significantly higher in MCU -KO neurons (p = 0.002 ). 
(B) Same as (A) for tetrode recordings in CA1 of freely -moving mice (top left schematic).  Whereas  
firing rate does not differ significantly between groups (p = 0. 45), burst probability is significantly 
higher in MCU -KO neurons (p = 0.00 2). 
(C) Wide -band LFP traces of SWR events aligned to the ripple peak (t = 0). Data represent mean ± 
SEM across events. Asterisk denotes a significant increase in peak ripple amplitude (p = 0.045), 
calculated from the bandpass -filtered signal (80 -250 Hz).  
(D) Instantaneous frequency of SWRs, calculated via Hilbert transform of the bandpass -filtered signal. 
MCU -KO exhibit a significantly faster oscillation frequency compared to Controls (p = 0.001).  
(E) Probability distribution of SWR durations. MCU -KO events are significantly shorter than Controls 
(p = 0.026).  
(F) Modulation of per -unit firing rates during SWRs (z -scored to baseline). Traces represent mean ± 
SEM across units.  
(G) Probability distribution of spike timing  during SWRs, defined as the center of mass relative to the 
SWR peak (dotted vertical line). Spiking in MCU -KO neurons is significantly advanced (shifted to 
negative time lags) compared to Controls (p = 0.027; Table S1).  
(H) Marginal effect of baseline burstiness on the spike center of mass during SWRs, calculated while 
holding baseline firing rate constant at its mean. Shaded regions indicate the 95% confidence 
intervals for the predicted means . 
 
  
Figure 3. MCU -KO impairs synaptic and homeostatic plasticity . 
(A) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for recording field excitatory postsynaptic 
potentials (fEPSPs) in the CA1 region of acute hippocampal slices. A stimulating electrode is 
placed in the Schaffer collateral pathway originating from CA3, and a  recording electrode is 
positioned in the stratum radiatum of CA1.  
(B) Input -output (I/O) curves showing the fEPSP slope (mV/ms) as a function of fiber volley amplitude 
(mV) in Control (n = 5) and MCU -KO (n = 6) slices. MCU -KO slices exhibit a significantly 
enhanced fEPSP slope for a given FV amplitude (p = 0.01), suggesting increased presynaptic 
release.  
(C) Paired -pulse ratio calculated as the ratio of the second fEPSP slope to the first with an inter -stimulus 
interval of 50 ms . Individual data points represent slices. MCU -KO slices show a significantly 
lower PPR compared to Control slices (p = 0.008), indicative of an increased probability of 
neurotransmitter release.  
(D) Long -term potentiation (LTP) at CA3 -CA1 synapses. The fEPSP slope is plotted as a percentage 
of baseline over time (horizontal dashed line). Theta -burst stimulation (TBS) was delivered at t=20 
min (vertical dashed line). MCU -KO slices exhibit significantly  impaired LTP compared to Control 
slices (p = 0.006). TBS consisted of 5 bursts at 100 Hz for 250 ms, with a 30 -second inter -burst 
interval.  
(E) Methodology for long -term continuous drug delivery to CA1 in vivo . From left to right: Schematic 
diagram illustrating the planned stereotaxic coordinates for the implants relative to Bregma. 
Locations for EEG screw, guide cannula, tetrodes, and ground (GND) screws are indicated. 
 Photograph of a mouse head -fixed in a stereotaxic apparatus during the surgical implantation 
procedure. The outline highlights the osmotic pump (teal), catheter (orange), and guide cannula 
(pink). Photograph of a mouse post -surgery, held in hand, showing t he final assembled head -
mounted implant.  Post-mortem visualization of implant placement. Photograph of the exposed 
mouse cranium showing the guide cannula and tetrodes at their final position. The inset provides 
an enlarged view of the guide cannula and te trodes.  
(F) Firing rate dynamics of Control (N  = 5; black) and MCU -KO (N  = 5; gold ) mice  during baclofen 
perturbation  (purple bar). Data represent mean ±  SEM  across units . Breaks in the time axis mark 
the implantation and removal of the osmotic pump.  
(G) Firing rates of individual units averaged over  24-hour epochs (experimental days) relative to 
baclofen onset (t=0). Horizontal bars indicate the mean. While control neurons recover steady -state 
firing equal to baseline (48 -72 hr; p = 0.16), MCU -KO neurons remained depressed throughout the 
perturbation (p < 0.0001). Correspondingly, the interaction between genotype and time is 
symmetric  initially  (p = 0.30) but becomes significant at day two  (24-48 hr; p = 0.0001) and day 
three (4 8-72 hr ; p = 0.0003) of bacl ofen treatment . Complete LME model presented in Table SX.  
(H) Relationship between baseline firing rate and firing rate recovery, expressed as a percentage of 
baseline. Each data point represents the aggregate mean across units per mouse . ANCOVA revealed  
no significant effects.  
(I) Relationship between baseline burstiness and firing rate recovery. ANCOVA revealed  a significant 
interaction between genotype and burstiness (p = 0.001) . Dashed lines mark the 95% confidence 
interval of a linear regression fit per group (Control: p = 0.00 9; MCU -KO: p = 0. 15). 
(J) Burst iness (Pburst; logit-transformed)  of individual units  at baseline (BSL) and steady -state (SS ; after 
three days of baclofen perturbation) . Horizontal bars indicate the mean. In contrast to baseline, 
MCU -KO neurons show no difference in  burstiness compared to Controls  (p = 0.59) . 
Panels  (B,D) analyzed using two -way RM ANOVA with Sidak's multiple comparisons test. Panel  (C) 
analyzed using the  Mann -Whitney test.  
 
 
 
 
   
Figure 4. Burstiness is a prognostic marker for homeostasis.  
(A) Temporal dynamics of single -spike firing (FR single; left) and burst -spike firing (FR burst; right) during 
the baclofen perturbation (purple bar).  
(B) Absolute differences in single -spike firing (ΔFR single) and burst -spike firing (ΔFR burst) between 
steady -state (SS) and baseline (BSL). Each point represents a single unit. Dotted crosshairs mark 
the point of no change. Solid lines depict orthogonal regression fits . The annotated angle quantifies 
the predominant direction of rate changes  relative to the unity line (dashed), which represents a 
proportional modulation of both components.  
(C) Temporal dynamics of single -spike firing (solid) and burst -spike firing (dotted) during the baclofen 
perturbation. Each neuron’s trace was normalized to its pre -perturbation baseline (dotted line). Data 
presented as geometric mean ± SEM across the populati on. 
(D) State space analysis of spike allocation during firing rate homeostasis for Control (left) and MCU -
KO (right) neurons. Single -spike firing gain as a function of burst -spike firing gain, where gain is 
calculated as the log -fold ratio between  steady -state and baseline. Solid lines depict linear 
regression fits. Burst-spike gain significantly predicts single -spike gain (β = 0.43; p < 0.0001) with 
no significant interaction by genotype ( β = -0.04; p = 0.22). A significant negative main effect of 
genotype (β = -0.97; p = 0.001) shifts the trajectory  of MCU -KO neurons  vertically downward . 
Complete LME model presented in Table SX.   
(E) Firing rate dynamics during the baclofen perturbation for neurons stratified by baseline burstiness. 
Control units (left) were categorized into low (< 0.1; n = 389; dotted), intermediate (0.1 -0.2; n = 
234; dashed), and high (> 0.2; n = 78; solid) burst pro bability. MCU -KO units  (right)  were 
categorized into low (< 0.4; n = 211), intermediate (0.4 -0.8; n = 126), and high (> 0.8; n = 42) burst 
probability. Data are expressed as a percentage of baseline (dotted line) and presented as geometric 
mean ± SEM.  
 (F) Mediation analysis of the relationship between baseline burstiness and steady -state firing. A series 
of three LME models were fitted separately for Control and MCU -KO neurons to disentangle the 
direct effect of baseline burstiness (X; [BSL]Pburst) on singl e-spike firing (Y; [SS]FRsingle) from 
its indirect effect mediated by burst -spike firing (M; [SS]FRburst). All models included baseline 
firing rate as a covariate. Stacked bars represent standardized coefficients (β) for the direct (blank) 
and indirect (st ripes) pathways. Black diamonds indicate the net total effect. Vertical lines mark the 
SEM of each effect. In control neurons, a minimal direct effect (β = -0.278 ± 0.051, p < 0.0001) is 
outweighed by a positive indirect effect (β = 0.528 ± 0.048, p < 0.00 01), resulting in a net positive 
total effect (β = 0.247 ± 0.063, p < 0.0001), where higher baseline burstiness predicts robust 
recovery of tonic firing. Conversely, MCU -KO neurons exhibit a severe negative direct effect (β = 
-0.591 ± 0.095, p < 0.0001) th at negated the indirect coupling (β = 0.252 ± 0.08, p = 0.001), leading 
to a net negative total effect and a collapse in tonic firing (β = -0.33 ± 0.123, p < 0.0001). Complete 
LME models presented in Table SX.  
(G) Feature ablation analysis, utilizing k -fold cross -validation, performed on an LME model predicting 
steady -state firing rate from baseline firing components ([SS]FR ~ [BSL]FRburst + [BSL]FRsingle 
+ (1|Name)). The y -axis quantifies the unique variance explai ned by each predictor, calculated as 
the absolute reduction in the out -of-sample coefficient of determination (∆R2OOS) when that term 
is removed from the full model (Control R2OOS = 0.29; MCU -KO R2OOS = 0.26). Dots represent 
individual cross -validation fol ds. Horizontal bars indicate the mean. FRburst contributes 
significantly more unique information than FRsingle across both groups, and significantly more in 
control than MCU -KO. Two -way RM ANOVA followed by Fisher’s LSD post -hoc tests.  
   
Figure 5. MCU -KO impairs hippocampal -dependent memory.  
(A) Schematic of the Novel Object Recognition (NOR) task. During the learning  phase, mice explore 
an arena containing two identical objects (one depicted for simplicity). During the test phase (after 
a 20-minute inter -trial interval ), one object is replaced with a novel object, and exploration times 
of both objects are recorded.  
(B) Discrimination Index for the NOR task . Individual data points represent mice  (Control: n = 13; 
MCU -KO: n = 12) , and horizontal bars indicate the group mean.  Whereas both groups spent equal 
time exploring the two objects during learning (p = 0.45), c ontrol mice showed  a preference for the 
novel object during the test phase that was completely absent  in MCU -KO mice (p = 0.004) . 
(C) Schematic of the Social Recognition task. During the learning  phase, mice interact with a juvenile 
conspecific mouse. During the test phase (a fter a 30 -minute inter -trial interval ), mice are re -exposed 
to the familiar juvenile along with a novel juvenile conspecific, and interaction times are recorded.  
(D) Discrimination Index for the Social Recognition task . Individual data points represent mice  
(Control: n = 18; MCU -KO: n = 17) , and horizontal bars indicate the group mean.  During the 
learning phase, both groups spent equal time exploring the two mice (p = 0.45). During the 
recognition phase, c ontrol mice showed  a preference for the novel mouse  that was completely 
absent  in MCU -KO mice (p = 0.004) . 
(E) Schematic of the Contextual Fear Conditioning (CFC) task. Mice placed in a conditioning chamber 
receive 3 electrical shock s (represented by a lightning bolt). During the test phase (after 24 hours ), 
mice return to the same conditioning chamber, and freezing behavior is measured.  
(F) Percentage of time spent freezing during the contextual fear memory test phase. MCU -KO mice (n 
= 25) display significantly lower contextual freezing compared to Control mice  (n = 21; p = 0.043) . 
 (G) Temporal dynamics of freezing behavior during the CFC test phase, presented as mean ± SEM. 
MCU -KO mice exhibit ed reduced freezing levels compared to control  mice ( p = 0.043).  
(H) Schematic of the Auditory Cued Fear Conditioning task. Mice placed in a conditioning chamber 
where an auditory cue (represented by a speaker icon) is paired with electrical shocks . During the 
test phase (after 24 hours), mice are placed in a novel context (altered visual and olfactory cues), 
and freezing behavior is measured during the presentation of the auditory cue alone.  
(I) Percentage of time spent freezing during the cued fear memory test in the novel context. No 
significant difference in cued freezing was observed between Control  (n = 22)  and MCU -KO mice  
(n = 24; p = 0.23) . 
(J) Temporal dynamics of freezing behavior during the cued fear memory test  phase . No significant 
difference was found between groups ( p = 0. 31) 
Panels (B,D,G,J) analyzed using  a two-way RM ANOVA  followed by Sidak’s multiple comparisons 
test. Panel (F) analyzed using an unpaired t test. Panel  (I) analyzed using the  Mann -Whitney tes t. 
 
    
Supp. Figure 1. Extracellular recordings from CA1 in  behaving mice. 
(A) Representative baseline data from a control mouse.  From top to bottom: hypnogram; spectrogram; 
EMG recordings; raster plot of RS (black) and FS (red) units; raw traces from a single tetrode. 
Dashed lines indicate an expanded view of the section above.  
(B) Trough -to-Peak time (ms) and Burst Index  (a.u.)  of RS and FS units from MCU -KO and Control 
mice.  Individual data points represent neurons  with point size proportional to their  firing rate. 
Assignment  of well -isolated clusters to RS and FS was done using a Gaussian Mixture Model 
(GMM) based on waveform features.  FS units were excluded from this study due to low unit count.  
(C) Representative waveform of an RS unit (top) and an FS unit (bottom) across four channels of a 
tetrode.  
(D) Representative autocorrelograms  of an RS unit (top) and an FS unit (bottom).  
 
  
  
Supp. Figure 2. MCU -KO alters SWR properties.   
(A) Marginal effect of baseline firing rate  on the spike center of mass during SWRs, calculated while 
holding baseline burstiness  constant at its mean. Shaded regions indicate the 95% confidence 
intervals for the predicted means . Firing rate did not significantly predict spike timing during SWR  
(p = 0. 1; Table S X). 
  
  
Supp. Figure 3. Homeostatic allocation of spikes  
(A) Burst and single spike firing rates  in Control (black) and MCU -KO (gold) neurons during baseline  
(BSL) . Marginal histograms display the distribution of firing rates for each axis, with dashed lines 
indicating the group means.  
(B) Same as (A) during steady -state (SS), after two days of baclofen.  
(C) Partial regression plot showing the unique variance shared between  log-fold changes in single -spike 
firing (FR single Gain ) and burst -spike firing (FR burst Gain ). To isolate the specific coupling between 
these variables, residuals were calculated by regressing out baseline firing rate and burstiness from 
each component. Solid lines depict linear regression fits. Dotted crosshairs mark the zero -residual 
center. Burst-spike residual s significantly predicts single -spike residual s (β = 0.43; p < 0.0001). A 
small  but significant interaction by genotype (β = +0.07; p = 0.035) indicates this coupling is 
stronger in MCU -KO neurons. Because the data represents mean -centered residuals, the regression 
lines cross exactly at zero with no main effect of genotype (β = 0; p  = 1). Complete LME model 
presented in Table SX.  
(D) Spike allocation in vivo . Relationship between burst -spike gain and single -spike gain, where gain 
is calculated as the log -ratio of the average rate during steady -state relative to baseline, and the 
average rate is the aggregate mean across units per mouse  (N = 5 animals per group). ANCOVA 
revealed a significant main effect of burst gain ( p = 0.034) but no t of genotype ( p = 0.59) and no 
interaction ( p = 0. 53). Consequently, a  pooled regression model confirm ed a conserved positive 
scaling rule across mice (p = 0.006). Dashed lines mark the 95% confidence interval of the linear 
regression fit.  
 
  
Supp. Figure 4. Burstiness but not firing rate predicts firing rate recovery  
(A) Marginal effects of baseline firing rate  on steady -state firing, calculated while holding baseline 
burstiness  constant at its mean . Effects are shown for single -spike firing ( left), burst -spike firing 
(middle ), and total firing rate (right). Shaded regions indicate the 95% confidence intervals for the 
predicted means .  
(B) Same as (A) for the m arginal effects of baseline burstiness , calculated while holding baseline firing 
rate constant at its mean .  
(C) (X → M): Relationship between baseline burstiness and steady -state burst -spike firing. β derived 
from Model 2: M ~ X + Covariates.  
(D) (M → Y | X): Partial residual plot showing the relationship between steady -state burst -spike firing  
(M; [SS]FR burst) and single -spike firing  (Y; [SS]FR single), adjusted for baseline firing rate and 
burstiness ( X; [BSL]P burst). The Y -axis represents the variance in single -spike firing unexplained 
by the baseline phenotype. β represents the standardized coefficient of FR burst from Model 1: Y ~ 
M + X + Covariates.  
(E) (X → Y | M): Partial residual plot showing the direct effect of baseline burstiness on steady -state 
single -spike firing, adjusted for steady -state burst -spike firing . β represents the standardized 
coefficient of P burst from Model 1 . 
(F) (X → Y): The total effect ( net prognostic relationship ) of baseline burstiness on steady -state single -
spike firing. β  derived from Model 3: Y ~ X + Covariates.  
 
  
  
Supp. Figure 5. The impact of burstiness is stable across various detection parameters.  
(A) Parameter sweep of burst detection criteria  in MEA recording s, including inter-spike interval (ISI) 
threshold s (y-axis) and minimum number of spikes (x -axis).  Labels show the p ercentage of Control 
units with zero detected bursts during baseline .   
(B) Same as (A) showing the Spearman rank correlation coefficient between baseline firing rate and 
burstiness in Control units.  Firing  rate was included as a covariate in all models involving 
burstiness.  
(C) Same as (A) showing the t -statistic for the effect of genotype on burstiness . Positive values indicate 
significantly higher burstiness in MCU -KO neurons.  
(D) Replication of the f eature ablation analysis  with various ISI thresholds  for detecting bursts  
(minimum spike count fixed at 3).  Stacked bars display the unique variance (∆R2OOS) in steady -state 
firing rate explained by baseline burst -spike firing (dotted), single -spike firing (solid gray), and 
their shared contribution (white). Related to Figure 4G. 
(E) Replication of the prognostic relationship between baseline burstiness and firing rate recovery in 
vivo using alternative burst metrics.  Left: Relationship using a Burst Index derived from the spike -
train autocorrelogram.  Right: Relationship using the same criteria for detecting bursts as in the 
MEA dataset . Related to Figure 3J. 
(F) Replication of the homeostatic allocation  of spikes  in vivo using the same criteria for 
detecting bursts as in the MEA dataset. Related to  Supp. Figure 3E.  
 
  
  
Supp. Figure 6. MCU -KO does not affect locomotor activity and anxiety -like behavior.  
(A) Total distance traveled (m eters ) by Control (n = 25) and MCU -KO (n = 22) mice across three 
consecutive 5 -minute Open Field sessions (OF1, OF2, OF3). Both groups traveled significantly less 
distance across sessions, indicating habituation (p < 0.0001). However, there was no significant 
difference in travel  distance between groups (p = 0.4 6) and no significant interaction between group 
and session (p = 0.63).  
(B) Total time (s econds ) spent in the center zone of the open field, an indicator of anxiety -like behavior . 
Both groups exhibited a significant decrease in center time across sessions, reflecting habituation 
(p < 0.0001). However, there was no significant difference between groups (p = 0.2 1) and no 
significant interaction between group and session (p = 0.2 7). 
(C) Total distance  (meters ) traveled by Control and MCU -KO mice during the first Open Field session 
(OF1).  No significant difference in locomotor activity is observed between Control and MCU -KO 
mice  (p = 0.22) .  
(D) Total duration spent in the center zone of the open field (s)  by Control and MCU -KO mice during 
the first Open Field session. Individual data points represent mice. No significant difference in 
center time is observed between Control and MCU -KO mice  (p = 0.45) . 
Panels (A,B) analyzed using  two-way RM ANOVA. Panels (C,D) analyzed using the  Mann -Whitney 
test.  
 
