J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
DOI 10.1007/s10827-011-0374-4
Improved measures of phase-coupling between spikes
and the Local Field Potential
Martin Vinck ·Francesco Paolo Battaglia ·
Thilo Womelsdorf ·Cyriel Pennartz
Received: 7 July 2011 / Revised: 9 October 2011 / Accepted: 10 November 2011 / Published online: 21 December 2011
© The Author(s) 2011. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract An important tool to study rhythmic neu-
ronal synchronization is provided by relating spiking
activity to the Local Field Potential (LFP). Two typesof interdependent spike-LFP measures exist. The firstapproach is to directly quantify the consistency of singlespike-LFP phases across spikes, referred to here aspoint-field phase synchronization measures. We showthat conventional point-field phase synchronizationmeasures are sensitive not only to the consistency ofspike-LFP phases, but are also affected by statistical de-
pendencies between spike-LFP phases, caused by e.g.
non-Poissonian history-effects within spike trains suchas bursting and refractoriness. To solve this problem,we develop a new pairwise measure that is not biasedby the number of spikes and not affected by statisticaldependencies between spike-LFP phases. The secondapproach is to quantify, similar to EEG-EEG coher-ence, the consistency of the relative phase betweenspike train and LFP signals across trials instead of
across spikes, referred to here as spike train to field
Action Editor: Alain Destexhe
M. Vinck (B)·F. P. Battaglia ·C. Pennartz
Cognitive and Systems Neuroscience Group,
Center for Neuroscience, University of Amsterdam,Amsterdam, The Netherlandse-mail: martinvinck@gmail.com
T. Womelsdorf
Centre for Vision Research, Department of Biology,York University, Toronto, ON, Canadaphase synchronization measures. We demonstrate an
analytical relationship between point-field and spike
train to field phase synchronization measures. Basedon this relationship, we prove that the spike trainto field pairwise phase consistency (PPC), a quantityclosely related to the squared spike-field coherence,is a monotonically increasing function of the numberof spikes per trial. This derived relationship is exactand analytic, and takes a linear form for weak phase-coupling. To solve this problem, we introduce a cor-
rected version of the spike train to field PPC that is
independent of the number of spikes per trial. Finally,we address the problem that dependencies betweenspike-LFP phase and the number of spikes per trialcan cause spike-LFP phase synchronization measuresto be biased by the number of trials. We show how tomodify the developed point-field and spike train to fieldphase synchronization measures in order to make themunbiased by the number of trials.
Keywords Spike-triggered average ·
Spike-field locking ·Spike-LFP ·Phase locking ·
Spike-field coherence ·Phase-synchronization
1 Introduction
Neuronal spiking outputs are often temporally coor-
dinated across neuronal groups. Temporal coordina-tion often manifests itself as rhythmic or phase syn-chronization, i.e. phase-coupling of oscillatory activity,which has been proposed as a candidate mechanism
for the flexible routing of neuronal signals (Abeles
1982 ;F r i e s 2005 ; Varela et al. 2001 ;B u r c h e l le ta l .
54 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
1998 ; Womelsdorf et al. 2010b ; Gielen et al. 2010 ;
Börgers and Kopell 2008 ; Salinas and Sejnowski 2001 ;
Buschman and Miller 2007 ; Benchenane et al. 2011 ;
Gregoriou et al. 2009 ), assembly formation (Singer
1999 ; Buzsáki 2010 ; Kopell et al. 2011 ; Canolty et al.
2010 ; Battaglia et al. 2011 ), and coding (König et al.
1995 ; Fries et al. 2007 ; Panzeri et al. 2010 ; Vinck et al.
2010a ; O’Keefe and Recce 1993 ; Azouz and Gray 2003 ;
Nadasdy 2010 ; Reimer and Hatsopoulos 2010 ; Siegel
et al. 2009 ; VanRullen et al. 2005 ; Havenith et al. 2011 ;
Koepsell et al. 2010 ).
To quantify rhythmic synchronization, we need to
relate signals generated by separate sources. An in-creasingly popular choice of signals is the combinationof spiking activity and the LFP (Local Field Potential)
(e.g. see Fries et al. 1997 ,2001 ; Gregoriou et al. 2009 ;
Pesaran et al. 2002 ,2008 ; Ray and Maunsell 2010 ;
Colgin et al. 2009 ; Csicsvari et al. 2003 ; Vinck et al.
2010a ; van Wingerden et al. 2010b ; Chalk et al. 2010 ;
O’Keefe and Recce 1993 ; Eeckman and Freeman 1990 ;
Womelsdorf et al. 2010a ; Brown et al. 2004 ; Jarvis and
Mitra 2001 ; Zeitler et al. 2006 ; Lepage et al. 2011 ;
Sirota et al.
2008 ; Siapas et al. 2005 ; Jacobs et al. 2007 ;
Donoghue et al. 1998 ;G r a ye ta l . 1989 ;W e h ra n d
Laurent 1996 ;C a r d i ne ta l . 2009 ; Sohal et al. 2009 ;
Okun et al. 2010 ; Bichot et al. 2005 ; Buffalo et al.
2011 ; Canolty et al. 2010 ; Montemurro et al. 2008 ;
Kayser et al. 2009 ; Mitchell et al. 2009 ; Ray et al. 2008 ;
Saalmann et al. 2007 ; van der Meer and Redish 2009 ;
Denker et al. 2011 ; Lakatos et al. 2007 ; Besserve et al.
2010 ; Zanos et al. 2011 ; Destexhe et al. 1999 ).
Spike-LFP measures are thought to be more
sensitive to phase synchronization than spike-spike
measures, because the LFP measures the compound
synaptic activity generated by a large pool of neurons(Mitzdorf 1985 ; Logothetis 2003 ). This sensitivity
is especially advantageous for the study of long-range interactions: Many studies have revealedfunctionally relevant changes in cross-areal spike-LFP phase synchronization (e.g. Pesaran et al. 2008 ;
W o m e l s d o r fe ta l . 2007 ; Siapas et al. 2005 ; Gregoriou
et al. 2009 ; Benchenane et al. 2010 ;C o l g i ne ta l . 2009 ;
Sigurdsson et al. 2010 ). In comparison to LFP-LFP
measures, spike-LFP measures have the advantage thatthey provide an indirect measure of the relationshipbetween spiking outputs and synaptic inputs (Okunet al. 2010 ; Harvey et al. 2009 ), and that they can
be related to neuronal firing rate selectivity (e.g.Gregoriou et al. 2009 ; van Wingerden et al. 2010b )
and cell type (Benchenane et al. 2010 ; Tukker et al.
2007 ; Klausberger et al. 2003 ; Csicsvari et al. 2003 ;
Hasenstaub et al. 2005 ; van Wingerden et al. 2010a
;
W u l f fe ta l . 2009 ; Sohal et al. 2009 ;C a r d i ne ta l .2009 ; Bragin et al. 1995 ; Gulyas et al. 2010 ), which
can provide useful insights into the mechanisms ofrhythmogenesis (for an overview, see Wang 2010 ). At
the same time, spike-LFP measures avoid the problemthat volume-conduction and common referencing cancreate spurious correlations between LFP signals (e.g.
Vinck et al. 2011 ; Nolte et al. 2004 ; Sirota et al. 2008 ;
Stam et al. 2007 ; Nunez and Srinivasan 2006 ).
A wide variety of spike-LFP measures exist, and they
can be categorized into two classes. Firstly, some mea-sures are based on a quantification of the consistencyof individual spike-LFP phases at a certain frequency(e.g. Vinck et al. 2010b ; Csicsvari et al. 2003 ;F r i e s
et al. 1997 ,2001 ; Grasse and Moxon 2010 ; Canolty et al.
2010 ; Tukker et al. 2007 ; Hansen and Dragoi 2011 ;
Siapas et al. 2005 ; Sirota et al. 2008 ;C o l g i ne ta l . 2009 ;
Denker et al. 2011 ). In this paper, we will refer to these
measures as point-f ield phase synchronization measures
(Fig. 1), because they relate single points, i.e. spikes,
to the ongoing LFP oscillations, i.e. fields. A major
Fig. 1 Illustration of point-field phase synchronization measures.
Spikes ( vertical ,solid lines ) are related to LFPs by determining
the instantaneous LFP phases at the times of spiking by centeringa window ( horizontal ,solid lines ) around every spike. Thus, the
phase for each spike is determined from the LFP snippet that
is centered around it. The instantaneous LFP phase at the timeof spiking can be directly gauged by using the dotted lines that
connect the spikes to the LFP. The frequency resolution, whichis inversely proportional to time resolution, is proportional to thewindow length, which needs to be sufficiently large. However, ifthe windows are too long, then the loss of time-resolution maylead to a decrease in spike-LFP phase consistency. The instan-taneous spike-LFP phases are depicted by the unit arrows that
originate from the spikes. The LFP was modeled as band-stop
filtered Gaussian white noise, as in Zeitler et al. ( 2006 ). Here,
we show only two ( m=1and m=2) out of Mavailable trials.
The measures of point-field phase consistency are computed overthenrelative spike-LFP phases. By vector addition of the n
spike-LFP phase vectors, a resultant vector is obtained, whoselength is conventionally taken as a measure of point-field phaseconsistency
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 55
problem bound to these point-field phase synchroniza-
tion measures is that they can be strongly biased bythe number of spikes. Previously, we addressed thisproblem by introducing the pairwise phase consistency(PPC) (Vinck et al. 2010a ).
However, there are two further problems related to
point-field phase synchronization measures that were
not solved by the PPC measure. Firstly, the problemthat by the direct quantification of the consistency of in-dividual spike-LFP phases through circular statistics, itis implicitly assumed that individual spike-LFP phasescan be modeled as outcomes of statistically indepen-dent random variables. This assumption is typically vi-olated because neurons display non-Poissonian historyeffects, such as refractoriness and bursting (Sections 2
and3). For example, given the observation of a certain
spike-LFP phase for a bursting neuron, we may bemore likely to observe a similar spike-LFP phase again,independent of the modulation of spiking probabilitywith LFP phase. To solve the latter problem, we de-velop a new point-field phase synchronization measurethat is not affected by a dependence between spike-LFP phases that were obtained from the same trial(Section 3). We achieve this by modifying the PPC
such that its computation is now based only on pairs
of spike-LFP phases that were obtained from separatetrials (see Eq. ( 3.1) below). A second problem that we
address here is that dependencies between spike countand spike-LFP phase, e.g. as consequence of theta orgamma phase precession/shifting (O’Keefe and Recce
1993 ; Vinck et al. 2010a ; Tiesinga and Sejnowski 2010 ;
Harris et al. 2002 ; Mehta et al. 2002 ; Schmidt et al.
2009 ; Siegel et al. 2009 ;H u x t e re ta l . 2008 ), can cause
point-field phase synchronization measures to becomebiased by the number of trials. We show how the point-
field PPC measure can be modified in order to render
it unbiased as a function of the number of trials (seeEq. ( 4.3) below).
The second class of spike-field measures is inspired
by the classical coherence approach for EEG and MEGdata (e.g., see Nunez and Srinivasan 2006 ; Mitra and
Pesaran 1999 ; Walter 1963 ;A d e ye ta l . 1961 ; Lachaux
et al. 1999 ) and is characterized by quantifying, for a
certain frequency, the consistency of the relative phases
between spike train and concurrent LFP signals across
trials , as opposed to quantifying it across spikes (Fig. 2)
(e.g. Fries et al. 2008 ; Gregoriou et al. 2009 ; Jarvis
and Mitra 2001 ; Pesaran et al. 2008 ; Chalk et al. 2010 ;
Pesaran et al. 2002 ; Lepage et al. 2011 ; Mitra and Bokil
2008 ). In this paper, we will refer to this second type of
measures as spike train to f ield phase synchronization
measures . With this approach, the spike trains are not
broken down into single spikes that are then related to
the LFPs around them, as opposed to the point-field
phase synchronization measures. Instead, the spiketrain to field phase synchronization measures are basedon the computed cross-spectra between the spike trainsignals of a certain duration and the concurrent LFPs.
Fig. 2 Illustration of spike train to field phase synchronization
measures. Spikes ( vertical ,solid lines ) are related to LFPs by
computing, using the Fast Fourier Transform, the respectivephase offsets of the spike train and the LFP at a particularfrequency ( grey arrows ) and subsequently determining the rel-
ative phase between these phase offsets ( black arrows ). Thus,
the relative phases are computed for a time-period, not for anindividual spike. The LFP was generated using the same model
as in Fig. 1. Shown here are two trials ( m=1and m=2). The
measures of spike train to field phase consistency are computedover the Mrelative phases. By vector addition of the Mrelative
phase vectors, a resultant vector is obtained, whose length isconventionally taken as a measure of the consistency of therelative phases between LFPs and spike trains
56 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
Although both point-field and spike train to field
phase synchronization measures are widely applied,it is unknown how they compare. In this paper, wederive an exact, analytical relationship (see Eq. ( 5.9)
below) between the point-field PPC measures and thespike train to field PPC, which is a quantity closely
related to the squared spike-field coherence (e.g. see
Jarvis and Mitra 2001 ), with the only difference that the
latter spike train to field index is a concurrent measureof amplitude co-variations as well, while the formerspike train to field PPC measure only considers theconsistency of relative phases. From this relationship,it follows that the spike train to field PPC is strictlypositively dependent on the number of spikes per trialif the consistency of individual spike-LFP phases is
independent of the number of spikes per trial. These
findings are consistent with the previous result that thespike train to field coherence is positively dependenton the number of spikes (Zeitler et al. 2006 ; Lepage
et al. 2011 ). Our analytic derivation is exact and directly
leads to two corrected versions of the spike train to fieldPPC measures that are fully independent of the numberof spikes per trial (Section 5).
The paper is organized as follows. We first introduce
conventional point-field phase synchronization mea-
sures (Section 2). In Section 3, we study the effect
of violations of the assumption of independency be-tween spike-LFP phases (for different spikes) on theseconventional point-field phase synchronization mea-sures, and introduce a point-field measure that doesnot require this assumption. In Section 4, we study
the consequences of a dependence between spike-LFPphase and spike count, and introduce a measure that
is not affected by this dependence. In Section 5,w e
demonstrate an exact, analytical relationship betweenpoint-field and spike train to field phase synchroniza-tion measures and study the dependence of spike trainto field phase synchronization measures on the numberof spikes per trial. We end with a comparison of the ad-vantages and disadvantages of the developed measures.
2 Definitions of conventional indices
2.1 A mathematical framework for point-field phase
synchronization measures
We first develop a mathematical framework for point-
field phase synchronization measures. Our startingpoint is the observed data, i.e. spike counts and spike-LFP phases, and we then proceed with modeling the
observed data as outcomes of random variables. Sup-
pose we perform simultaneous recordings of an LFPand the spiking activity of a neuronal source. We
model the trial-wise spike counts by defining the vectorof identically and independently distributed randomvariables N≡(N
1,..., NM)∈NM,w h e r e Mis the
number of trials, whose observed value is definedasn≡(n
1,..., nM)∈NM, i.e. the experimentally ob-
served counts of spikes emitted in each trial. Define
N≡/summationtextM
m=1Nm, and its observed value n≡/summationtextM
m=1nm,
the observed total number of spikes. The set of trialsthat contained at least one spike is defined as
M≡
{m∈{1,..., M}:Nm>0}, such that |M|is the number
of trials with at least one spike. For every spike, we takethe LFP segment that is centered around it, as illus-trated in Fig. 1, and spectrally decompose it, to obtain
the spike-LFP phase at each frequency f. The spectral
decomposition of the LFP may, without loss of general-
ity, be based on e.g. the Discrete Fourier Transform orthe Hilbert Transform on the filtered signal. Thus forall trials m∈
Mwe observe, at a particular frequency
f, a data vector θm(f)≡(θ1,m(f) ,...,θ nm,m(f))con-
taining nmspike-LFP phase values, which are depicted
in Fig. 1. The dependence of θmand related statistics
on frequency is omitted and implicitly assumed in whatfollows.
In order to make statements about the statistics
of the population from which these sample spike-LFP phase data were drawn, we model the observedspike-LFP phases as outcomes of random variables. Astraightforward approach may seem to define ninde-
pendent and identically distributed random variables(/Theta1
1,...,/Theta1 n)(as in Vinck et al. 2010b ). However, the
number of spikes itself is a random variable, suchthat we cannot restrict ourselves to defining nrandom
variables. Furthermore, for a given trial, the spike-LFP
phase may be statistically dependent on the number ofspikes, as it is for example the case when theta phaseprecession (O’Keefe and Recce 1993 ) is present. To
account for these two intricacies, we proceed as follows.For all m∈{1,..., M},l e t/Theta1
m=(/Theta11,m,/Theta12,m,...) be a
vector of random variables. For all (k,m)∈{(k,m):
k∈{1,... Nm},m∈M}, we let the observed value of
/Theta1k,mequal a randomly chosen—without replacement—
element of θm, and obtain a vector representation of
the spike-LFP phases by defining the spike-LFP phase
vector U k,m≡(cos(/Theta1k,m),sin(/Theta1k,m)).
Thus, for all m∈M, we model all /Theta1k,melements
of/Theta1mfor which 1≤k≤Nmas identically distributed
(i.e., across time). In practice, it can occur that spike-LFP phases from the same trial are not identicallydistributed, because the mean spike-LFP phase can bea function of a time-varying variable, which occurs for
example during theta phase precession (O’Keefe and
Recce 1993 ) and gamma phase-shifting (Vinck et al.
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 57
2010a ). Mixing distributions with different mean spike-
LFP phases causes an average decrease in point-fieldphase synchronization measures. If the mean spike-LFP phase is indeed non-stationary, then this reductionin point-field phase synchronization measures may beavoided by using one of the following two strategies.
Firstly, by computing our point-field phase synchro-
nization measures over smaller trial segments for whichthe mean spike-LFP phase is approximately station-ary, at the cost of an increase in estimator variance.Secondly, by explicitly modeling the mean spike-LFPphase as a function of a time-varying random variable,and subsequently computing our point-field phase syn-chronization measures over the residual model errorterms, as in Vinck et al. ( 2010a ).
Further, for all k∈{1,2,...}, we model all elements
of the vector (/Theta1
k,1,...,/Theta1 k,M)as identically distributed
(i.e., across trials). In practice, it can occur that spike-LFP phases are not identically distributed across trials,e.g. as a consequence of pooling trials across differentexperimental conditions or as a consequence of learn-ing processes. Again, the consistency of spike-LFPphases is, on average, decreased by mixing distributionswith varying mean spike-LFP phases.
Thus far, we did not make statements about the
statistical dependence or independence between thedifferent /Theta1
k,m’s (the spike-LFP phases). While the
assumption of independence between the spike-LFPphases from the same trial is convenient from a statis-tical perspective (Section 2.2), it may be often violated
in practice (Section 3). Henceforth, we assume that a
dependence between spike-LFP phases can only occurfor spike-LFP phases from the same trial, i.e. we assume
that random variables are statistically independent if
they represent spike-LFP phases from separate trials
(Assumption 1).
Assumption 1 Spike-LFP phase vectors from separate
trials are conditionally independent given observationof the spike count.
This assumption implies that for all (k,m,j,l)for
which l/negationslash=m, the equation
E{U
k,m·Uj,l|Nm,Nl}=E{Uk,m|Nm}·E{Uj,l|Nl}
(2.1)
holds, where ·is the dot product operation. From the
independence of Nmand Nl, it follows that the equation
E{Uk,m·Uj,l}=E{Uk,m}·E{Uj,l}holds as well. The
justification of Assumption 1 is that dependencies will
mostly act on short timescales, and that spike trainstatistics will typically be reset by an inter-trial in-
terval. Assumption 1 does not require that the LFPsare not phase-synchronized across trials. If the LFPattains the same phase offset relative to a trial eventin every trial, then the spike-LFP phase vectors fromdifferent trials can still be independent of each other,
e.g. if the spike trains are generated by a homogeneous
Poisson process, or if the inter-trial interval duration issufficiently long. Nevertheless, phase-synchronizationof the LFPs across trials may well cause Assumption 1to be violated if the inter-trial interval is short relativeto the oscillatory cycle duration. In that case, non-Poissonian history effects such as autorhythmicity cancause dependencies between spike-LFP phases acrosstrials. The violation of Assumption 1 has the same
consequences as a violation of Assumption 2 (which
will be introduced in Section 2.2), namely a systematic
increase or decrease in the PPC (Section 3).
2.2 Direct application of circular statistics to spike-LFP
phase data
It is common practice in neurophysiology to directly
compute circular statistics over the concatenated datavector of spike-LFP phases. Whether this leads to validconclusions about the relationship between the LFPand spiking activity remains to be demonstrated. Sup-pose that the following two additional assumptions hold
however:
Assumption 2 Spike-LFP phase vectors from the same
trial are conditionally independent given observation ofthe spike count.
This assumption implies that for all (k,j,m)for
which k/negationslash=jthe equality
E{U
k,m·Uj,m|Nm}=E{Uk,m|Nm}·E{Uj,m|Nm}
(2.2)
holds. In other words, this assumption holds that, given
observation of the spike count Nm, the spike-LFP phase
vectors from the mth trial are independent, i.e. that the
observation of one spike-LFP phase vector does notchange the expected value of another spike-LFP phasevector from the same trial. The conditional indepen-dence (given N
m) is important here: If spike-LFP phase
and spike count are statistically dependent, then theunconditional independence between the spike-LFPphase vectors from the same trial does not necessarily
hold given Assumption 2. The reason for this is that the
observation of a certain spike-LFP phase may change
58 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
the expected value of Nm, which could in turn change
the expected value of the other spike-LFP phase vec-tors. Unconditional independence will only be attainedby making the additional assumption of independencebetween spike count and spike-LFP phase (Assump-tion 3, see below). Example cases where Assumption 2
is violated, e.g. as a consequence of non-Poissonian
history effects, will be presented in Section 3.
Assumption 3 Independence between spike count and
spike-LFP phase.
This assumption holds that the expected value of
U
k,mis independent of Nm,f o r k≤Nm, i.e. that the ex-
pected value of the spike-LFP phase vector Uk,mis in-
dependent of the number of spikes that were observedin the mth trial. Example cases where this assumption
is violated will be presented in Section 4.
Based on the /Theta1
k,m’s (spike-LFP phases) and Nm’s
(spike counts), we can now define several statisticsthat estimate the consistency of spike-LFP phases,
e.g. the resultant vector length (Eq. ( 2.5)). In order
to define the population parameters corresponding tothese estimators, we will now define random vari-ables that are identically distributed to the U
k,m’s.
Let N(1)and N(2)be two random variables inde-
pendently and identically distributed, such that foranyn
m∈N,Pr{N(1)=nm}=Pr{N(2)=nm}=Pr{Nm=
nm|Nm>0}.L e t/Theta1be a random variable and U(1)and
U(2)two statistically independent random vectors iden-
tically distributed to the vector (cos(/Theta1), sin(/Theta1)) ,s u c h
that the equation E {U(1)|N(1)=nm}=E{U(2)|N(2)=
nm}=E{Uk,m|Nm=nm}holds for 1≤k≤nm. Given
Assumptions 1–3, it follows that for any (N(1),N(2))∈
N2, the equation
E{U(1)·U(2)|N(1),N(2)}=E{U(1)}·E{U(2)} (2.3)
holds.
We now proceed with defining conventional statis-
tics quantifying the consistency of spike-LFP phases,relying on Assumptions 1–3. A natural statistic for theconsistency of the spike-LFP phases is provided bythe circular resultant length, which is defined, on thepopulation level, as
R≡|E{exp(i/Theta1)}|. (2.4)
Its direct estimator is defined as
ˆR≡/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle1
N/summationdisplay
m∈MNm/summationdisplay
k=1exp(i/Theta1k,m)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle. (2.5)This statistic is sometimes also referred to as the
(point-field) PLV (‘phase locking value’). Given ourAssumptions 1–3, it follows that the estimator ˆRis
strongly biased by sample size, i.e. approaches Rfrom
above. This is a problem when comparing neuronsor experimental conditions with a small, varying and
uncontrollable number of spikes (Vinck et al. 2010b ).
Therefore, the PPC estimator (Vinck et al. 2010b ),
which is graphically illustrated in Fig. 3(a), is our pre-
ferred statistic at the descriptive level, and for perform-ing simple parametric inferential statistics at the grouplevel, and is defined as
ˆP
0≡⎛
⎝/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈MNm/summationdisplay
k=1Nl/summationdisplay
j=1Uk,m·Uj,l⎞
⎠−N
N(N−1). (2.6)
The corresponding population parameter of the PPC is
defined as
P≡E{U(1)·U(2)}. (2.7)
The quadruple sum in Eq. ( 2.6) computes the dot
product for all combinations of two spike-LFP phase
vectors ( Uk,m·Uj,l) for a given pair of trials ( mand
l), and repeats this for all pairs of trials ( m∈Mand
l∈M), such that the dot product is computed for all
N(N−1)combinations of two spike-LFP phase vec-
tors. The numerator term −Naccounts for the fact
that the quadruple sum in Eq. ( 2.6) contains Ndot
products of phase vectors for which (k,m)=(j,l).T h e
dot product of a spike-LFP phase vector with itself (the
diagonal entries in Fig. 3(a)) is always one, and does not
contribute to the ˆP0statistic.
The PPC can be interpreted as quantifying the av-
erage coincidence between any two spikes in the LFPphase domain. Two spikes are maximally coincident inthe LFP phase domain if their relative spike-LFP phaseequals zero, and they are maximally non-coincidentif their relative spike-LFP phase equals ±π. The dot
product measures to what extent two spikes (with ob-
served phases θ
k,mandθj,l) are coincident in the LFP
phase domain, by outputting cos(θk,m−θj,l). For exam-
ple, the dot product takes on the value −1if two spikes
are maximally non-coincident, and +1 if two spikes are
maximally coincident. The choice of the dot productfunction instead of the absolute angular distance (i.e.,relative phase) as a measure of coincidence is motivatedby the relationship P=R
2between the PPC and the
resultant vector length (Vinck et al. 2010b ).
The expected value of ˆP0is obtained by taking its
expected value conditional on N, which is required
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 59
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3 Illustration of the point-field PPC ˆP0and the point-field
PPC ˆP1.(a) Nine spike-LFP phases from four different trials are
recorded. These spike-LFP phases are depicted by the arrows,which are duplicated on the x-and y-axis . This gives 9·9=
81potential 2-combinations of spike-LFP phases across trials.
The extent to which two spike-LFP phase vectors coincide is
measured by the dot product. The point-field PPC ˆP
0equals
the average dot product of spike-LFP phase vectors across all2-combinations of different spikes. The nine 2-combinations of
spikes with themselves are not taken into account, which isindicated by the diagonal patterns. ( b)S a m ea si n( a), but the
point-field PPC ˆP
1equals the average dot product of spike-LFP
phase vectors across all 2-combinations of spikes from differenttrials.The 2-combinations of spikes from the same trial are nottaken into account, which is indicated by the diagonal patterns
because the Nm’s are random variables themselves,
and subsequently taking the expected value over allpossible realizations of N. Assume that Pr{N>1}=1,
because the PPC is not defined for N<2, because
we need at least one pair of spike-LFP phase vectors
to compute the PPC. Using Assumptions 1 and 2, it
follows that
E{ˆP0|N=n}
=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈Mnm/summationdisplay
k=1nl/summationdisplay
j=1E{Uk,m·Uj,l|Nm,Nl}−n
n(n−1)
=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈MnmnlE{U(1)·U(2)|N(1)=nm,N(2)=nl}−n
n(n−1).
(2.8)
Assumptions 1 and 2 allow us to replace the Uk,mand
Uj,lterms by the independent and identically distrib-
uted random variables U(1)andU(2), such that the termnmnlappears in the numerator. By using Assumption 3
and Eq. ( 2.3), Eq. ( 2.8) simplifies to
E{ˆP0|N=n}=E{U(1)}·E{U(2)}
≡P. (2.9)
Equation ( 2.9) shows that E {ˆP0|N=n}does not de-
pend on n. Hence, it follows that E {ˆP0}≡E{E{ˆP0|N=
n}} = P, showing that, given Assumptions 1–3, ˆP0is an
unbiased estimator of P. Note that while 0≤P≤1,w e
have−1≤ˆP0≤1.
If we make Assumptions 1–3, then P>0indicates
that a neuron has a preferred LFP phase of firing, i.e.that spiking probability is modulated with LFP phase.To test whether the inequality P>0holds, one could
for example use the Rayleigh test, or test whether thedistribution of ˆP
0’s across neurons differs from zero.
As will be shown in Sections 3and 4, the validity of
these statistical inferences is based on Assumptions 1–3
as laid out above.
60 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
3 The problem of statistical dependence
between spike-LFP phases
The assumption that observed spike-LFP phases can
be modeled as outcomes of independent random
variables (Assumption 2) is typically violated. One
cause of this violation is that neurons typically donot behave as homogenous or inhomogeneous Pois-son sources (Shinomoto et al. 2009 ), because neurons
have several physiological properties, e.g. refractori-ness, autorhythmicity and burstiness, that cause non-Poissonian history effects (Section 3.2.1 ). Another rea-
son for dependencies between spike-LFP phases tooccur is that the LFP may not cover all phases uni-
formly in a given trial (Section 3.2.2 ). If we ignore that
Assumption 2 is violated and directly apply circularstatistics to the observed vector of spike-LFP phases asin Eqs. ( 2.5)a n d( 2.6), then we may draw invalid con-
clusions about the relationship between spiking activityand the LFP, especially if the number of trials is small.
The problem posed by dependencies between spike-
LFP phases is that the dot product term U
k,m·Uj,lin
Eq. ( 2.6) may be biased towards producing higher or
lower values if l=m, i.e. if spike-LFP phases fall in the
same trial, in comparison to the case l/negationslash=m, i.e. if spike-
LFP phases fall in separate trials.
If we make Assumption 1, but not Assumption 2,
then we can conclude that the statistical dependencebetween spike-LFP phases may especially have a largeimpact on point-field phase synchronization measuresif the number of trials is relatively small, becausethe number of independent spike-LFP phases scales
with N(N−1)/2, whereas the number of possibly
dependent spike-LFP phases scales only with approx-imately M/parenleftbig
N/M
2/parenrightbig
. For example, suppose that all spike-
LFP phases within the same trial are statistically de-pendent, and that the number of spikes per trial equals
N/M=40. For one, two, and ten trials, the fraction of
dependent spike-LFP phases equals 1, 0.5 and 0.1 re-spectively, and it tends to zero as M→∞ . The regime
in which Mis small can be of great importance to
neurophysiology, e.g. when studying the involvement
of rhythmic neuronal synchronization in memory andlearning processes (e.g., van Wingerden et al. 2010b ;
Hansen and Dragoi 2011 ;T o r te ta l . 2009 ; Popescu et al.
2009 ).
3.1 Solution to the dependence problem
The goal of this section is to provide a solution to
the problem that spike-LFP phases from the same trialcan be statistically dependent. We solve the problem
of statistical dependence between spike-LFP phasesas follows. Instead of computing the dot product ofspike-LFP phase vectors across all combinations of twospikes (Fig. 3(a)), we compute it only for combina-
tions of spikes that were recorded from separate trials
(Fig. 3(b)). Let
L≡{l:l∈M,l/negationslash=m}.W ed e f i n et h e
point-field PPC ˆP1estimator of Pas
ˆP1≡/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LNm/summationdisplay
k=1Nl/summationdisplay
j=1Uk,m·Uj,l
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LNmNl. (3.1)
Note the similarity between Eqs. ( 2.6)a n d( 3.1),
whereas they differ in that the quadruple sum now runs
only over all pairs of separate trials ( m∈Mandl∈L).
If we make Assumption 3 and the assumption thatPr{|
M|<2}=0, then the conditional expected value of
this estimator equals
E{ˆP1|N=n}
=E⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈Lnm/summationdisplay
k=1nl/summationdisplay
j=1Uk,m·Uj,l
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈Lnmnl/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleN⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈Lnm/summationdisplay
k=1nl/summationdisplay
j=1E{Uk,m·Uj,l|Nm=nm,Nl=nl}
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈Lnmnl
=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LnmnlE{U(1)·U(2)|N(1)=nm,N(2)=nl}
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈Lnmnl.
(3.2)
Assumption 1 allows to replace the Uk,mand Uj,l
terms by the independent and identically distributed
random variables U(1)and U(2), such that the term
nmnlappears in the numerator. The product nmnlacts
as a weighting factor, assigning heavier weight to ex-pected values of spike-LFP phase vectors for trialswith many spikes. However, if Assumption 3 holds,
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 61
then this weighing factor falls away by division, and
equation
E{ˆP1|N=n}=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LnmnlE{U(1)·U(2)}
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈Lnmnl
=E{U(1)·U(2)}
≡P (3.3)
holds. Thus, the ˆP1statistic is not affected by a de-
pendence between the spike-LFP phases (note that thederivation of Eqs. ( 3.1)a n d( 3.2) does not make use of
Assumption 2). This is our first main result, improv-ing the point-field PPC ˆP
0measure. We will show in
Section 5that the PPC ˆP1measure allows to derive
an analytical relationship between point-field (Fig. 1)
and spike train to field phase-synchronization measures
(Fig. 2).
It should be noted, however, that the ˆP1estimate
cannot be obtained in case only a single trial is avail-able. This problem may to some extent be circum-vented by removing pairs of spike-LFP phase vectorson the basis of a time-difference threshold, i.e. by re-jecting combinations of spikes if they lie too closely to-gether in time. The same approach, i.e. rejection on the
basis of a time-threshold, is possible for data-sets that
are not divided into trial and inter-trial interval periods.Finally, it should be noted that the ˆP
1estimator has a
higher variance than the ˆP0estimator if Assumption 2
does hold, especially if the number of trials is small,because the computation of the ˆP
0statistic is based
on more combinations of two spike-LFP phase vectorsthan the computation of the ˆP
1statistic.
3.2 Simulations of the effect of a statistical dependence
between spike-LFP phases on the ˆP0andˆP1
estimators
3.2.1 Ef fect of refractoriness and burstiness
To study the effect of a statistical dependence between
spike-LFP phases on point-field phase synchronizationstatistics, we performed simulations with the followingmodel. Initially we assumed that neuronal firing wasdescribed as a Poisson process, with the instantaneous
rate parameter defined by λ(φ( t))=β/2π, where the
LFP-phase was defined as a linear function of time, i.e.φ(t)=2πft, such that there was no modulation of spik-
ing probability with LFP phase. The probability of ob-serving a spike in the interval [t,t+δ]was equal to theproduct δλ ( φ( t))for small δ. Thus, spiking probability
was a linear function of the parameter β, which equaled
the expected number of spikes per oscillatory cycle.We assumed that the trial duration was of length k/f
for integer k. In this model, spike-LFP phases can be
considered as outcomes of independent random vari-
ables: The observation of a spike at a particular time-
point does not change the probability density of firingat other time-points. Correspondingly, the observationof a spike at a particular LFP phase does not alter theprobability density of firing at other LFP phases, andthe point-field PPC ˆP
0would be an unbiased estimator.
To demonstrate the effect of a refractory period with
simulations, we set λ(φ( t))=0for the duration of the
refractory period after a spike was fired. We chose
f=20Hz, a time-window that comprised 500 time-
steps of 0.0001 s (such that k=1)a n dβ=100. Without
a refractory period, the number of spikes equaled onaverage β·500·0.0001=5per trial. We then exam-
ined two lengths of the refractory period: 8 (Fig. 4(a))
and 40 ms (Fig. 4(b)). Figure 4(a) and (b) show the
expected ˆP
0value (solid line) as a function of the
number of trials. Figure 4(a) shows that in the presence
of a refractory period of 8 ms, the expected ˆP0value
attained negative values and approached its asymptotic
value from below. This result can be explained as fol-lows: If the refractory period is short in comparisonto the oscillatory cycle period, then the observation ofa particular spike-LFP phase makes the observationof similar spike-LFP phases less likely, causing theexpected value of the dot product of spike-LFP phasevectors from the same trial to decrease. However, whenthe refractory period was relatively long in comparison
to the oscillatory cycle length, then ˆP
0approached its
asymptotic value from above (Fig. 4(b)). The latter
result can be explained as follows: If the duration ofthe refractory period approaches the duration of theoscillatory cycle period, then the observation of a spike-LFP phase makes the observation of similar spike-LFPphases on average more likely, causing the expectedvalue of the dot product of spike-LFP phase vectorsfrom the same trial to increase. In contrast to the point-
field ˆP
0measure, we did not observe any dependence
of the ˆP1measure on the number of trials. Thus, the
ˆP1measure correctly indicated, on expectation, that
there was no modulation of spiking probability withLFP phase.
To demonstrate the effect of burstiness we per-
formed the following simulation. Instead of addinga refractory period to the Poisson model, we nowadded for every spike fired an additional spike with
the same phase (i.e., duplicating all spike-LFP phases).
62 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 4 Influence of dependence between spike-LFP phases on
point-field phase synchronization measures. ( a) Estimated, ex-
pected point-field PPC ˆP0(solid ), and point-field PPC ˆP1values
(dotted )(y-axis ) as a function of the number of trials ( x-axis ),
in the presence of an absolute refractory period of 8 ms. The
grey portion of the solid ˆP0curve highlights that no ˆP1estimate
exists when only one trial is available. ( b) Similar to ( a), but
now in the presence of an absolute refractory period of 40 ms.(c) Influence of burstiness on point-field phase synchronization
measures. Estimated expected point-field PPC ˆP
0(solid ), and
point-field PPC ˆP1value ( dotted )(y-axis ) as a function of the
number of trials ( x-axis ). For every spike fired, we added one
extra spike with the same phase. ( d) Influence of incomplete
coverage of LFP phases on estimated, expected point-field PPC
ˆP0(solid ), and point-field PPC ˆP1values ( dotted )(y-axis )a sa
function of number of trials ( x-axis ), with the neuron firing only
during 20% of the cycle duration
Figure 4(c) shows that a strong negative dependence of
the expected ˆP0value on the number of trials emerged,
such that ˆP0approached its asymptotic population
value from above. Even though the probability of firing
was equal for all LFP phases, the expected ˆP0value
still attained positive values for a finite number of trials.Again, in contrast to the point-field ˆP
0measure, we did
not observe any dependence of the ˆP1measure on the
number of trials. Thus, the ˆP1measure correctly indi-
cated, on expectation, that there was no modulation ofspiking probability with LFP phase. The effect of burst-ing on the PPC may be explained as follows. The PPCquantifies coincidences of spikes in the LFP phase do-
main. Spikes from the same neuron are expected to becoincident in the LFP phase domain if the probability ofspiking is modulated by LFP phase. Bursting can causespikes from the same trial to have a certain amount ofcoincidence in the time domain. Because the LFP phase
is an approximately linear function of time (e.g., see SI
Fig. 1 in Canolty et al. 2010 ), this time-domain coinci-
dence can cause spikes from the same trial to becomecoincident in the spike-LFP phase domain as well, eventhough spiking probability is not modulated with LFPphase.
3.2.2 Ef fect of non-uniform sampling of the LFP
phases
Dependencies between spike-LFP phases can also oc-
cur because of statistical dependencies between instan-taneous LFP phases within the same trial, i.e. can be aconsequence of properties of the LFP signal instead ofthe spike train signal. For example, a dependence be-tween instantaneous LFP phases occurs if the windowlength that is used to compute a point-field phase syn-chronization measure does not equal an integer mul-
tiple of 1/f, causing the instantaneous LFP phases to
be non-uniformly covered across time. Consequently,given the observation of a particular instantaneous LFPphase at a certain time-point, regardless of whether aspike was fired there, we will be more likely to observesimilar instantaneous LFP phases at other time-pointswithin the same trial. This is exemplified by the simula-tion that was performed for Fig. 4(d). We set the trial
duration to k/f=0.01s (in 100 steps of 0.0001 s) with
k=0.2,f=20,β=100, as above, but without further
non-Poissonian history effects. The ˆP
0statistic was
negatively biased by the number of trials (Fig. 4(d)),
despite the fact that spike trains were generated ac-cording to a homogeneous Poisson process. In contrastto the point-field ˆP
0measure, we did not observe any
dependence of the ˆP1measure on the number of trials,
and the ˆP1measure correctly indicated that there was
no modulation of spiking probability with LFP phase.
Taken together, the results from Section 3.2show
that dependencies between spike-LFP phases withinthe same trial can arise because of many factors. Thereare various consequences: (i) The equation E {ˆP
0}≥0
does not hold in general. (ii) It is not recommend-able to use the Rayleigh test to assess whether spikingprobability is modulated with LFP phase because thetest assumes that phases are outcomes of independent
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 63
random variables. (iii) The equation E {ˆP0}>0can
hold even in the absence of a modulation of spikingprobability with LFP phase. (iv) The estimator ˆP
0is
unbiased by the number of spikes only if the spike-LFP phases can be treated as outcomes of independentrandom variables. However, in practice, they usually
cannot, and as a result ˆP
0can be both positively and
negatively biased by the number of trials. Because thenumber of spikes per trial determines the ratio of thenumber of possibly dependent over the number of in-dependent spike-LFP phases, it affects the ˆP
0estimator
as well. In opposition to our previous claim (Vincket al. 2010b ), we conclude that the ˆP
0statistic is not an
unbiased estimator if Assumption 2 is violated.
4 Effect of dependence between spike count and phase
We dealt with the violation of Assumption 2 by devel-
oping the point-field PPC ˆP1measure. In order for this
measure to be unbiased as a function of the number
of trials, we need to make Assumption 3. However,in practice this assumption may be violated, which canintroduce a positive or negative bias as a function of thenumber of trials.
There are two possible relationships between the
spike count and the distribution of spike-LFP phases.Firstly, the consistency of spike-LFP phases and thespike count can be statistically dependent. For example,
the strength of V1 gamma-band synchronization has
been found to be positively dependent on stimulus size,while the V1 firing rate has been found to be negativelydependent on stimulus size (Gieselmann and Thiele2008 ). To give an example of the effect of a negative
dependence between spike-LFP phase consistency andfiring rate on the point-field PPC ˆP
1, we studied the
model
λ(φ m(t))=βmg(φm(t);μ,κ), (4.1)
where gis the von Mises density, κ=0.9,μ=0,a n d
βmwas a uniformly distributed random variable on
the interval [200, 600]. Spiking probability was a linearfunction of the parameter β
m, which equaled the ex-
pected number of spikes per oscillatory cycle. The LFPphase was defined as
φ
m(t)=2πft+2π/epsilon1(t)((βm−200)/400)2, (4.2)where /epsilon1(t)was a random variable uniformly distributed
on the interval [0,1].F o rl a r g e βm, a large error term
was added to the LFP phase. Thus, small amplitudenoise was added to spike-LFP phases when a trialcontained a small number of spikes (i.e., β
msmall), and
large amplitude noise was added when a trial contained
a large number of spikes (i.e., βmlarge), thereby imple-
menting a negative correlation between the firing rateand phase locking as in the V1 data (Gieselmann andThiele 2008 ) mentioned above. Figure 5shows that in
this model, the ˆP
1measure was positively biased by the
number of trials.
Secondly, it can occur that the mean spike-LFP
phase co-varies with the spike count. For example, incase of pooling trials across experimental conditions
(e.g. orientations), it can occur that trials with higher
firing rates correspond to an advanced spike gammaphase (Vinck et al. 2010a ), which can bias the ˆP
1mea-
sure as a function of the number of trials.
4.1 A point-field measure unaffected by rate-phase
dependencies
We will now define a statistic that is not affected by
phase-spikecount dependencies, and hence not biasedby the number of trials. We call the defined statistic thepoint-f ield PPC ˆP
2measure, and define it as
ˆP2≡1
|M|(|M|−1)/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈L/parenleftBigg/summationtextNm
k=1/summationtextNl
j=1Uk,m·Uj,l
NmNl/parenrightBigg
.
(4.3)
1
2
Fig. 5 Influence of dependence of spike-LFP phase consistency
and spike count on point-field phase synchronization measures.
Estimated, expected point-field PPC ˆP1(solid ), and point-field
PPCˆP2values ( black ,dotted )(y-axis ) as a function of the number
of trials ( x-axis ), where trials with a large number of spikes have
a noisier phase distribution
64 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
The key difference with the ˆP1measure is that in
Eq. ( 4.3), the sum of dot products across combinations
of two spike-LFP phase vectors for a pair of separatetrials(m,l)is first averaged, i.e. normalized by the num-
ber of combinations N
mNl. The average dot product for
a pair of separate trials is then averaged across all pairs
of separate trials ( m∈Mandl∈L). Thus, in the com-
putation of ˆP2, a trial with few spikes will be given the
same weight as a trial with many spikes. Consequently,spike-LFP phases from trials with few spikes are given astronger weight than spike-LFP phases from trials withmany spikes. The rationale behind the ˆP
2measure is
the following: Because the number of combinations oftwo spike-LFP phase vectors equals N
mNlfor a pair of
separate trials, both trials are given equal weight in the
computation of the average dot product for that pair of
trials. As a trivial example, suppose that the first trialcontains 20 spikes and the second trial contains 100spikes, then there are 100·20=2,000 combinations
of spike-LFP phases containing spikes from the firsttrial, but also 2,000 combinations of spike-LFP phasescontaining spikes from the second trial. For a largernumber of trials, the trials with a large number ofspikes will contribute to more combinations of spike-
LFP phase vectors for the ˆP
1statistic. For example
if we add a third trial that contains 50 spikes, thenthe first trial will contribute to 20·100+20·50=3,000
combinations, but the second trial will contribute to100·20+100·50=7,000 combinations of two spike-
LFP phases. This occurs because the normalizationterm in Eq. ( 3.1)(/summationtext
m∈M/summationtext
l∈Lnmnl) is a function of the
nm’s itself, such that it is less influenced by a single nmif
the number of trials is large. This explains why in Fig. 5,
theˆP1measure is negatively dependent on the number
of trials.
From Assumption 1, it follows that the expected
value of ˆP2conditional on N, assuming that Pr{|M|<
2}=0, equals
E{ˆP2|N=n}
=1
|M|(|M|−1)
×/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LE⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩Nm/summationdisplay
k=1Nl/summationdisplay
j=1Uk,m·Uj,l
nmnl/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglenm,nl⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LE{U(1)·U(2)|N(1)=nm,N(2)=nl}
|M|(|M|−1).(4.4)N o t et h a t ,i nc o m p a r i s o nt oE q .( 3.1), we removed the
weighing factor nmnl.
The expected value over all possible outcomes of the
spikecounts for which |M|>1is then given as
E{E{ˆP2|N=n}}
=∞/summationdisplay
n1=1···∞/summationdisplay
nM=1/productdisplay
m∈MPr{N(1)=nm}
×/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LE{U(1)·U(2)|N(1)=nl,N(2)=nm}
|M|(|M|−1)
=∞/summationdisplay
nm=1∞/summationdisplay
nl=1E{U(1)·U(2)|N(1)=nl,N(2)=nm}
×Pr{N(1)=nm}Pr{N(2)=nl}
=E{U(1)·U(2)}
=|E{U(1)}|2
≡P. (4.5)
The results of the simulation that are presented in Fig. 5
show that, indeed, phase-spikecount dependence doesnot lead to a bias of ˆP
2on the number of trials.
Note that
E{U(1)}=∞/summationdisplay
nm=1E{U(1)|N(1)=nm}Pr{N(1)=nm},(4.6)
i.e. E {U(1)}corresponds to the expected spike-LFP
phase vector, and is not affected by a potential de-pendence between spike count and spike-LFP phase.If Assumption 2 holds, then E {ˆP
1}=E{ˆP2}. Also, for
|M|=2, the equality E {ˆP1}=E{ˆP2}holds. However,
as|M|→∞ ,ˆP1→|E{Z}|2where the resultant vector
E{Z}equals
E{Z}=∞/summationdisplay
nm=1Pr{N(1)=nm}nmE{U(1)|N(1)=nm}
∞/summationdisplay
nm=1Pr{N(1)=nm}nm.
(4.7)
5 Relationship between the point-field PPC ˆP1
and the spike train to field PPC
5.1 Definition of the spike train to field locking indices
We will now demonstrate a relationship between on
the one hand the point-field ˆP1andˆP2measures,
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 65
and spike train-LFP phase synchronization measures
on the other hand. Suppose we observe Mtrials of
LFP and spike train signals. Again, let /Theta1k,mbe the
relative phase between a concurrent LFP segment andan individual spike at a particular frequency, with thespike-LFP phase now defined relative to the concurrent
LFP segment (Fig. 2), i.e., not in a centered fashion as
in Section 2.
For all m∈
M, the cross-spectrum between spike
train and LFP in a given trial is then defined as
Cm≡AmNm/summationdisplay
k=1exp(i/Theta1k,m), (5.1)
where Amis defined as the magnitude of the Fourier
spectrum of the mth LFP signal at frequency fand
the spikes are assigned unit energy at frequency f.T h e
single-trial resultant length over the individual spike-LFP phases is defined as
R
m≡/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/summationtext
Nm
k=1Xk,m/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
Nm, (5.2)
where Xk,m≡exp(i/Theta1k,m). Note that 0≤Rm≤1.T h e
power of the spike-train (at a given frequency) equals(N
mRm)2. If at a given frequency all the spikes are in
phase, then the power of the spike train equals N2
m.T h e
single-trial circular mean spike-LFP phase is defined as
¯/Theta1m≡arg/parenleftBiggNm/summationdisplay
k=1Xk,m/parenrightBigg
, (5.3)
and the variables Nm,Rmand¯/Theta1mare related by the
equation
Nm/summationdisplay
k=1Xk,m≡RmNm¯Xm, (5.4)
where ¯Xm≡exp(i¯/Theta1m). Finally, we define the phase
vector Vm≡(/Rfractur{¯Xm},/Ifractur{¯Xm}), which is depicted in
Fig.2. Note that ¯/Theta1mis the relative phase between spike
train and LFP for the mth trial. We define the spike
train to field PLV as the resultant length across spike
train to field phases, i.e. |M|−1/summationtext
m∈M¯Xm.T h es p i k e
train to field PLV is a quantity closely related to the‘spike-field coherence’ (e.g., see Jarvis and Mitra 2001 ),
except for the fact that the former ignores amplitudeco-variations and assigns an equal weight to every trialthat contains at least one spike, while the latter weighsthe trials according to the product of LFP and spiketrain spectral magnitude, i.e. A
mNmRm(at a given fre-
quency), and is a concurrent measure of amplitude co-
variations. We may quantify the consistency of relative
phases across trials by directly using the PPC, whichremoves the bias of the spike train to field PLV, by
defining
ˆS2=1
|M|(|M|−1)/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LVm·Vl, (5.5)
and we refer to this measure as the uncorrected spike
train to f ield PPC ˆS2. By normalizing by |M|(|M|−1),
the measure takes into account that no predictionsabout the LFP phase can be made if a trial does notcontain spikes. Let Φbe a random variable identically
distributed to ¯/Theta1
mfor all m∈M. The statistic ˆS2is
an unbiased estimator of its corresponding population
value, which is defined as S2=|E{exp(iΦ)}}|2(Vinck
et al. 2010b ).
It may occur that neuronal output is highly predictive
of LFP phase, but that a neuron fires only in a smallnumber of trials, such that the predictive value of thespike train across all trials is much lower than indicated
by the ˆS
2measure. To accommodate this, and to assess
to what extent spike trains predict the LFP phase across
all trials, we define the measure
ˆS(⋆)
2=1
M(M−1)/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LVm·Vl. (5.6)
Note that because |M|≤M, the inequality ˆS(⋆)
2≤ˆS2
holds.
In Eq. ( 5.5), all |M|relative phases are assigned
the same weight. However, the pairwise statistic may
be turned into a weighted pairwise statistic, similar tothe weighted phase-lag index in Vinck et al. ( 2011 ),
defining
ˆS
(w)=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LWmWl(Vm·Vl)
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LWmWl.
(5.7)
If we define Wm=RmNmAm, then the expected
value of the numerator equals the numerator of the
squared spike-field coherence (e.g. see Jarvis and Mitra2001 ). A special case of weighing is obtained when we
letW
m=RmNm, i.e., the spectral magnitude of the
spike train at a particular frequency, defining
ˆS1=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LRmRlNmNl(Vm·Vl)
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LRmRlNmNl.
(5.8)
We refer to this measure as the uncorrected spike
train to f ield PPC ˆS1.The rationale behind this
66 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
weighted measure is that every individual spike-LFP
phase is given an equal weight by weighing by NmNl,
as will be shown below. Further, we will show that theweighting factor R
mRlcan be used to correct for the
number of spikes per trial.5.2 Relationship between point-field PPC and spike
train to field PPC
We now derive a relationship between the point-field
ˆP1measure and the ˆS1measure. We observe that the
equations
ˆP1≡/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LNm/summationdisplay
k=1Nl/summationdisplay
j=1Uk,m·Uj,l
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LNmNl=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈L/parenleftBiggNm/summationdisplay
k=1Uk,m/parenrightBigg
·⎛
⎝Nl/summationdisplay
j=1Uj,l⎞
⎠
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LNmNl
=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈L⎛
⎝Nm/summationdisplay
k=1sin(/Theta1k,m)Nl/summationdisplay
j=1sin(/Theta1j,l)+Nm/summationdisplay
k=1cos(/Theta1k,m)Nl/summationdisplay
j=1cos(/Theta1j,l)⎞
⎠
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LNmNl
=/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LRmNmRlNlVm·Vl
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LNmNl(5.9)
hold.
The final expression in Eq. ( 5.9) is nearly identical
to the right-hand expression in Eq. ( 5.8). We define the
corrected (using the abbreviation ‘corr.’) spike train tofield PPC ˆS
corr
1as
ˆScorr
1≡ˆS1/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LNmRmNlRl
/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LNmNl. (5.10)
Note that this measure is, similar to the ˆP1statistic,
not unbiased as a function of the number of trials, un-less we make the assumption that the single spike-LFPphases are independent of the spike count (Assumption
3). Similarly, we define the corrected spike train to field
PPCˆS
corr
2as
ˆScorr
2=1
|M|(|M|−1)/summationdisplay
m∈M/summationdisplay
l∈LRmRlVm·Vl.(5.11)
Similar to the ˆP2measure, this measure is not biased by
the number of trials, even if Assumptions 2 and 3 areviolated. The main difference between the ˆS
corr
1and the
ˆScorr
2measure is that the former assigns an equal weightto every spike-LFP phase (i.e., /Theta1k,m), by weighing the
influence of a trial by NmNl, whereas the latter assigns
an equal weight to every phase obtained for a trial
(i.e., ¯/Theta1m), thereby weighing those spikes heavier that
occurred in trials with few spikes.
If we define the individual spike-LFP phases in
an identical way for ˆP1andˆScorr
1, then the equality
ˆP1=ˆScorr
1holds and the measures have mathematically
equivalent definitions. Thus, we conclude that there ex-ists a simple mathematical relationship between point-field PPC ˆP
1and the uncorrected spike train to field
PPC ˆS1. Because the point-field ˆP1andˆP2measures
are unaffected by the number of spikes per trial, we
conclude that the same property holds for the measures
ˆScorr
1andˆScorr
2respectively, solving the problem that
their respective uncorrected counterparts can strongly
depend on the number of spikes. We may thus regard
ˆScorr
1andˆScorr
2as measures of both the consistency of
individual spike-LFP phases and of the relative phasesbetween spike trains and LFP signals across trials, with
a correction factor for the number of spikes per trial.
The definitions of ˆP
1andˆP2are equivalent to the
definitions of their respective spike train to field coun-terparts ˆS
corr
1andˆScorr
2, expect for the fact that the
individual spike-LFP phases are not computed in the
same way. We predict that, as a consequence of this
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 67
difference in phase estimation, the inequalities ˆP1>
ˆScorr
1andˆP2>ˆScorr
2typically hold if Pr{Nm>1}is small.
This prediction has the following rationale: For spiketrain to field phase-synchronization measures, spikescan fall at arbitrary positions relative to the concurrentLFP segment (Fig. 2), such that they sometimes fall
close to the borders of the concurrent LFP segment. On
the other hand, for point-field phase-synchronizationmeasures, they fall per definition at the center of theLFP segment that is used to compute the spike-LFPphase (Fig. 1). The instantaneous LFP phase is not
a strict linear function of time, but decorrelates overtime, because neuronal (e.g. gamma or theta) oscilla-tions contain energy over a relatively large range offrequencies. We assume that spiking probability at a
given time-point is especially modulated by the local
fluctuations in the LFP around that time-point, butnot by distant past or future fluctuations in the LFP.The decorrelation of LFP phase across time will thencause a decrease in the magnitude of the side-lobesof the spike-triggered LFP average as a function oftime (e.g. see Fig. 1H-I in Fries et al. 2001 ). If a spike
falls at the border of an LFP segment, then its spike-LFP phase is determined predominantly from either
past or future LFP fluctuations, and will be computed
based on a larger portion of the LFP signal to whichthe spikes are not locked. For the point-field measure,the spike-LFP phase will be computed based on alarger portion of the LFP signal to which the spikesare locked. To counter the decorrelation in LFP phasesacross time, the LFP segment could be decreased induration. However, this would decrease the frequencyresolution, and thereby increase the amount of spectral
leakage.
5.3 Dependence of spike train to field PPC
on the mean and variance of the spike count
From the properties of the resultant length R
mit fol-
lows that ˆS1andˆS2are statistically dependent on N.
The equation 0≤Rm≤1holds, and Rmis positively
biased by Nm, i.e. approaches its asymptotic value from
above (e.g. see Vinck et al. 2010b ). Thus, given a fixed
distribution of individual spike-LFP phases, it follows
that the expected values of ˆS1andˆS2are positively
dependent on the expected value of Nm, consistent with
previous results on the spike-field coherence (Zeitleret al. 2006 ; Lepage et al. 2011 ). There are two cases
in which ˆS
1andˆScorr
1are approximately equal. Firstly,
if for all m∈{1,..., M},Pr{Nm>1}=0,t h e n ˆS1=
ˆScorr
1andˆS2=ˆScorr
2. Secondly, if the consistency of theindividual spike-LFP phases is very high, then Rmis
close to 1, and ˆS1≈ˆScorr
1. However, if the consistency
of the phases is very low and the number of spikes pertrial is large, then ˆS
1will be small, yet much larger than
ˆScorr
1(Fig. 6).
These relationships can be intuitively explained as
follows. The statistics ˆS1andˆS2measure the consis-
tency of relative phases across trials . For a given trial,
the computation of a relative phase is based on av-eraging across multiple single spike-LFP phases. Theaverage of multiple single spike-LFP phases is moreconsistent than the single spike-LFP phases themselves,because averaging will remove variance across the sin-gle spike-LFP phases. If the single spike-LFP phasesare only weakly consistent, then the average over many
single spike-LFP phases will be much more consistent
than the single spike-LFP phases themselves.
However, the expression R
mRlis a function not only
ofNmand Nl, but also of the statistical dependence be-
tween spike-LFP phases. If spike-LFP phases become,ceteris paribus, more positively (negatively) dependent,then the expected value of R
mwill increase (decrease),
and consequently the expected values of ˆS1andˆS2
will decrease (increase). Thus, the expected values of
ˆS1andˆS2depend on three main factors, namely the
number of spike-LFP phases per trial, the statisticaldependence of the individual spike-LFP phases, and
Fig. 6 Comparison of
uncorrected and correctedspike train to field PPC ˆS
1.
(a)Y-axis : corrected spike
train to field PPC ˆScorr
1
(dotted ) and uncorrected
spike train to field PPC ˆS1
(solid ).X-axis : number of
spikes per trial. Differentlines represent different
coupling strength, with thevon Mises dispersionparameterκ∈{0.1,0.5,1,20}.
(b) Empirically observed and
analytically predictedcorrection factor for spike
train to field PPC ˆS
1(y-axis )
as a function of the number ofspikes per trial ( x-axis ), again
forκ∈{0.1,0.5,1,20}(a)
(b)
68 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
the consistency of the individual spike-LFP phases. The
ˆScorr
1andˆScorr
2measures remove the dependence on the
first two factors and offer a purer measure of the lastfactor.
To demonstrate the relationship between the ex-
pected value of ˆS
1and the number of spikes by
simulations, we drew samples of spike-LFP phases from
a von Mises distribution with dispersion parameterk∈{0.1,0.5,1,20}. The number of spikes per trial N
m
was fixed, such that for all m,Nm∈{1,..., 100}.T h e
number of trials Mequaled 100. Figure 6(a) shows
the estimated expected values of ˆScorr
1(dotted) and
ˆS1(solid) as a function of the number of spikes per
trial. The ˆScorr
1measure attained values independently
ofNm.F o r Nm=1, the equality ˆScorr
1=ˆS1held. As Nm
increased, ˆS1strongly increased. The ratio ˆScorr
1/ˆS1in-
deed had the form of the correction factor in Eqs. ( 5.10)
(Fig. 6(b)). Note that for large expected values of ˆScorr
1,
ˆS1rapidly approached one, while it rose linearly with
the number of spikes per trial for a small expectedvalue of ˆS
corr
1. This linear relationship implies that an
x% increase in firing rate, without a concurrent change
in the distribution of single spike-LFP phases, entailsanx% increase in uncorrected spike train to field PPC
ˆS
1for low expected values of ˆS1and a relatively small
number of spikes per trial.
If our aim is to compare ˆS1orˆS2between two exper-
imental conditions that have a different distribution ofspike counts, then it is insufficient that the means of thespike counts are equal. As we will now show, other pa-rameters of the distribution of spike counts, especiallythe variance, should be equal as well, and these para-meters may very well differ between conditions. Forexample, the variance of spike counts can be a function
of attention (e.g. Mitchell et al. 2007 ). To demonstrate
the influence of the spike count variance (across trials),we compared two conditions with an equal averagespike count, but with a different variance of the spikecounts. Phase samples were drawn from a von Misesdistribution with dispersion parameter κ=1,a n dw e
set the number of trials M=100. In the first condition,
the variance of the counts equaled zero ( zero-variance
condition ). In the second condition, the spike count
was distributed according to a Poisson distribution, i.e.
the spike count variance equaled the mean spike count(Poisson condition ). Figure 7shows the difference in ˆS
1,
ˆS2andˆS⋆
2between the Poisson and the zero-variance
condition, as a function of the expected spike count pertrial, E {N
m}.T h e ˆS1measure attained higher values for
the Poisson distribution than for the zero-variance con-dition. The cause of this difference is that the weightsFig. 7 Influence of firing rate variance on spike train to field
phase synchronization measures. Dashed : spike train to field PPC
ˆS1for Poisson distribution minus spike train to field PPC ˆS1for
zero-variance distribution, as a function of the number of spikes
per trial. Positive values indicate a larger ˆS1value for Poisson
distribution. Solid : as for dashed, but now for spike train to field
PPCˆS2.Dashed-dotted : as solid, but now for spike train to field
PPCˆS⋆
2
Nmin Eq. ( 5.8) give a stronger weight to trials with
more spikes, and that the average spike-LFP phaseobtained from these trials is more reliable. The ˆS
2
measure on the other hand showed two opposite trends.
Because trials with zero spikes (i.e., Nm=0)a r el e f t
out in Eq. ( 5.5), the effective firing rate was higher for
the Poisson condition, which increased the value of ˆS2
for the Poisson condition for small E {Nm}. However,
the results of Fig. 6(a) imply that the consistency of
¯/Theta1mdoes not depend linearly on Nm, but is a concave
function of Nm. This concavity led to a relative decrease
in the value of ˆS2for the Poisson condition, an effect
which became dominant as E {Nm}≥5. For the ˆS⋆
2mea-
sure, only the latter effect was present, causing the ˆS⋆
2
measure to be higher for the zero-variance condition
than for the Poisson condition.
6 Discussion
6.1 Relationship between firing rate and uncorrected
spike train to field PPC measures
We demonstrated that the spike train to field PPC
measures can be corrected for the positive dependenceon the number of spikes per trial. However, correctingfor this positive dependence does not preclude thepossibility that the consistency of the single spike-LFP
phases (i.e., point-field phase-synchronization) is cor-related with the firing rate. Still, the latter correlation
would be the result of a physiological relationship,
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 69
and a change in the firing rate could be the conse-
quence of a change in spike-LFP phase-coupling aswell. On the other hand, the positive effect of the firingrate on the uncorrected spike train to field PPC mea-sures is a result of a statistical relationship, i.e. higher
(lower) spike train to field phase-synchronization ap-
pears because a neuron has more (less) spikes per
trial.
No a priori statements can be made about the cor-
relation between the consistency of single spike-LFPphases and the firing rate. Independent variation canbe caused by subsampling spike trains, or by a failureof one’s measurement or spike-sorting system to detecta spike. A negative correlation between the firing rateand the consistency of spike-LFP phases may be a
result of an increase in the amplitude of inputs that
are not coherent with the LFP (Zeitler et al. 2006 ), or
it may be a consequence of the inhibitory nature ofthe rhythm generators (Gieselmann and Thiele 2008 ;
van Wingerden et al. 2010a ; Donoghue et al. 1998 ;
Jensen and Mazaheri 2010 ). In case of such a negative
correlation, it can occur that the point-field PPC mea-sures decrease while the increase in firing rate causesa simultaneous increase in the uncorrected spike train
to field PPC measures. A positive correlation between
point-field phase synchronization and firing rate canbe found in visual cortex, where visual stimulation andhigh contrast stimuli can increase both firing rates andthe precision of gamma-band synchronization (Grayet al. 1989 ; Henrie and Shapley 2005 ). Selective visual
attention can increase both gamma-band synchroniza-tion and firing rate (Fries et al. 2001 ,2008 ; Gregoriou
et al. 2009 ) in V4 and FEF (but not in V1 (Chalk et al.
2010 )). If the firing rate is positively correlated with
the consistency of individual spike-LFP phases, thenboth the point-field PPC measures and the uncorrectedspike train to field PPC measures increase, althoughthe proportional increase in the value of the latter willtypically be larger.
6.2 Comparison between single-unit field
and multi-unit field phase synchronization
measures
Spike-field phase synchronization measures can be
based either on single unit activity (SUA), or multi unitactivity (MUA). Because MUA contains more spikesper second than SUA, and because spiking activity ofdifferent neurons is partially driven by uncorrelated
inputs which renders their respective spike-LFP phasesmore independent, MUA-field measures will in general
attain higher uncorrected spike train to field PPC val-ues, as shown by Zeitler et al. ( 2006 ).
This relative gain of the MUA is not present for
the point-field PPC and corrected spike train to fieldPPC measures however. In fact, we predict that the
point-field PPC measures typically attain lower values
for MUA-field pairs than SUA-field pairs: Differentneuronal cell types, e.g. fast spiking basket cells andpyramidal cells, fire preferentially at different LFPphases (Klausberger et al. 2003 ; Tukker et al. 2007 ;
Csicsvari et al. 2003 ; Hasenstaub et al. 2005 ; Okun
and Lampl 2008 ). Furthermore, the preferred LFP-
phase of spiking of neurons in the hippocampus andvisual cortex is input-dependent (Vinck et al. 2010a ;
O’Keefe and Recce 1993 ). This divergence of preferred
LFP-phases, a factor that was ignored in Zeitler et al.(2006 ), tends to broaden the distribution of individ-
ual spike-LFP phases for the MUA. The effect oflinearly mixing spiking activity from different cells issimilar to linearly mixing trials across experimentalconditions with different mean spike-LFP phases (Sec-tion 3). Thus, MUA-field point-field synchronization
will typically be weaker than SUA-field point-field
synchronization.
6.3 Comparison of point-field PPC ˆP
0and PPC ˆP1
In Sections 6.3,6.4and 6.5, we will discuss the advan-
tages and disadvantages of the developed measures,whose properties are summarized in Table 1.T h e ˆP
1
estimator (Eq. ( 3.1)) solves the problem that the ˆP0
measure can be affected by dependencies between
spike-LFP phases from the same trial. We believe that
the effect of dependencies between spike-LFP phases
on the ˆP0measure should be considered undesirable,
and that the ˆP1measure is therefore to be preferred. It
should be emphasized however that e.g. refractorinessor burstiness can cause a true change in the consistencyof spike-LFP phases, which should be detected by apoint-field phase synchronization measure. However,besides changing the consistency of spike-LFP phases,refractoriness and burstiness also introduce a statistical
dependence between spike-LFP phases from the same
trial, an effect which should be distinguished from thechange in the distribution of spike-LFP phases. For alarge number of trials, ˆP
0will be exclusively deter-
mined by the modulation of spiking probability withLFP phase. For a small number of trials, ˆP
0can also
determined by the dependencies between spike-LFP
70 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75Table 1 Summary of performance different phase synchronization indices
Dependent Effect of Effect of dependence Biased by Relationship
on number dependence between between spikecount number with otherof spikes? spike-LFP phases? and phase? trials? statistics
Point-field PLV ( ˆR). +/−+ /−+ /− AsM→∞ ,ˆR2→ˆP0
Point-field PPC ˆP0 0 +/−+ /−+ /− AsM→∞ ,ˆP0→ˆP1
Point-field PPC ˆP1 00 +/−+ /− If spike count and spike-LFP phase are independent,
then ˆP1=ˆP2and Var {ˆP2}≥Var{ˆP1}
Point-field PPC ˆP2 00 0 0
Spike train to field PLV ++ /− 0 − AsM→∞ ,g o e st o/radicalBig
ˆS2
Uncorrected spike train ++ /−+ /−+ /− Approximately a factor of 1/¯R2larger than ˆScorr
1
to field PPC ˆS1 where ¯Ris the average single-trial resultant length.
Uncorrected spike train ++ /− 0 0 About a factor of 1/¯R2larger than ˆScorr
2
to field PPC ˆS2 where ¯Ris the average single-trial resultant length.
Corrected spike train 0 0 +/−+ /− Only difference to ˆP1lies in phase-estimation
to field PPC ˆScorr
1
Corrected spike train 0 0 0 0 Only difference to ˆP2lies in phase-estimation
to field PPC ˆScorr
2
‘+/−’: means that effect can be positive or negative. ‘0’: means that statistic is not affectedphases. For example, spiking probability may not be
modulated with LFP phase, however burstiness cancause E {ˆP
0}to exceed zero. The question that we
are interested in is whether neurons tend to fire con-sistently at particular phases of the LFP oscillation,i.e., whether the ongoing phase of the LFP can be
predicted from the observation of a spike. However,
a dependence between spike-LFP phases will affecttheˆP
0measure even if we replace the LFP by a
white noise signal that bears no relationship to neu-ronal firing. The availability of a phase consistencymeasure that alleviates the dependency from firingrate and history-effects goes in the same direction asthe derivation of statistically independent measure ofsingle cell spiking intensity and cell-cell interaction in
the information geometry paradigm (Nakahara et al.
2006 ).
6.4 Comparison of point-field PPC ˆP
1and PPC ˆP2
TheˆP2(Eq. ( 4.3)) estimator differs from the ˆP1mea-
sure in that the former cannot be affected by dependen-cies between the spike-LFP phase and the spike count.Whether or not ˆP
2is a better measure than ˆP1depends
on the properties of the data, and our measurementgoals. If there is no relationship between the spikecount and the spike-LFP phase distribution, then the
ˆP
1estimator is to be preferred above the ˆP2estimator,
because the former has a smaller estimator variance.Whether spike count and spike-LFP phase are indeeddependent may be tested by using the data itself. Onthe other hand, if there is a relationship between thespike count and the spike-LFP phase distribution, thentheˆP
1andˆP2measures estimate a different population
parameter. The question is then, what do ˆP1andˆP2
measure?
TheˆP1measure gives an answer to the following
question: To what extent is the probability of ob-serving a spike modulated with LFP phase? This fol-lows from the fact that it simply counts how manyspikes fell at a particular phase, and characterizesthat distribution. The probability of observing a spikein a small interval [φ(t), φ( t)+δ]is approximately
equal to
Pr{s=1|φ(t)}
≈
∞/summationdisplay
nm=1Pr{Nm=nm}f(φ(t)|Nm=nm)/parenleftbigg
nmδ
T/parenrightbigg
,
(6.1)
where sis a binary variable indicating the occurrence of
a spike, f(φ)is a probability density function modeling
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 71
the modulation of spiking probability with LFP phase
φ(t)∈[ −π,π]. The modulation of spiking probabilitywith LFP phase can then be quantified by the resultant
vector length
R=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/integraltextφ(t)=π
φ(t)=−πPr{s=1|φ(t)}exp(iφ(t))dφ(t)}/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
/integraltextφ(t)=π
φ(t)=−πPr{s=1|φ(t)}dφ(t)
=/integraltextφ(t)=π
φ(t)=−π/summationtext∞
nm=1Pr{Nm=nm}f(φ(t)|nm)nmexp(iφ(t))dφ(t)
/integraltextφ(t)=π
φ(t)=−π/summationtext∞
nm=1Pr{Nm=nm}f(φ(t)|nm)nmdφ(t)
=/summationtext∞
nm=1Pr{Nm=nm}nm/integraltextφ(t)=π
φ(t)=−πexp(iφ(t))f(φ(t)|nm)dφ(t)
/summationtext∞
nm=1Pr{Nm=nm}nm. (6.2)
If for all nm≥1we let E {exp(i/Theta1)|N(1)=nm}=/integraltextφ(t)=π
φ(t)=−πexp(iφ(t))f(φ(t)|Nm=nm)dφ(t), then this
equation equals Eq. ( 4.7), i.e. the asymptotic value that
theˆP1measure is estimating.
The question that the ˆP2measure answers is the
following: If we know that a spike occurred at a certain
time-point, then to what extent can the LFP-phase
at the time of spiking be predicted, without further
knowledge of the spike count? In this case, the spikehas already occurred, and the estimated phase vector is
given by Eq. ( 4.6). If we would have used information
about the spike count then the expected spike-LFP
phase would have changed if spike count and spike-LFP
phase were statistically dependent on each other. Thus,
theˆP
2measure tells us to what extent we can predict
the instantaneous LFP-phase from the occurrence of aspike, if we ignore the information in the spike count,
i.e. if we assume that all spike counts are equally likely.
There are two cautionary remarks about the use of
theˆP
1measure however. Firstly, when we mix experi-
mental conditions it should be realized that the averagewill then be dominated by the experimental conditionswith the most spikes. Secondly, while the ˆP
1measure
is not biased by the number of spikes or dependencies
between spike-LFP phases, it can still be biased as a
function of the number of trials. The fact that the ˆP1
measure may in that case have some statistical bias
can be dealt with by using e.g. randomization statistics
(e.g. Maris et al. 2007 ). On the other hand, a statistical
dependence between spike count and spike-LFP phase
cannot ‘create’ an expected ˆP1value that exceeds zero:
If for all trials, firing probability is not modulated with
LFP phase, then E {ˆP1}=0.
TheˆP2measure may sometimes detect a relationship
between spiking probability and the LFP phase, while
theˆP1measure does not, because the LFP phase
preference of a neuron can sometimes become visible
only over trials. For example, if a neuron has a firingrate non-stationarity then the modulation of spiking
probability with LFP phase may only become apparent
over trials.
6.5 Comparison of point-field and corrected spike train
to field phase synchronization measures
The corrected spike train to field phase synchroniza-
tion measures solved the problem that the uncorrected
spike train to field phase synchronization measures
are strongly dependent on the spike count distribu-tion. The only difference between the point-field andcorrected spike train to field phase synchronizationmeasures is that the latter define the phase in a non-centered way, whereas the former define spike-LFPphases in a centered way. In fact, both measures aremathematically equivalent if the individual spike-LFPphases are defined in the same manner. In practice,
this means that both measures are roughly equivalent
if the windows that are used to determine spike-LFPphases are equally long, provided that the LFP phasedoes not decorrelate on a too rapid time-scale. Anadvantage of the spike train to field approach is thatit is computationally more efficient, because in case ofpoint-field PPC measures, the instantaneous LFP phaseneeds to be determined for every spike separately.
If the spike-LFP phases are defined in a centered
way, then the point-field PPC measures to what extent
the occurrence of a spike can be predicted from theinstantaneous, ongoing LFP phase, or, vice versa, towhat extent the instantaneous LFP phase can be pre-dicted from the observation of a spike. Spike train tofield phase-synchronization measures, with the phasedefined in a non-centered way, indicate to what extentthe phase of an LFP signal at arbitrary moments intime, including those moments in time where no spike
was observed, can be predicted from the observation
of the concurrent spike train. Because spike train to
72 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
field phase-synchronization measures are inspired on
the classical EEG-EEG coherence approach (by takingthe complete spike train signal) we expect them to bemore closely related to EEG-EEG measures or thecoherence of the membrane potential of a neuron tothe LFP.
The measures and estimation procedures described
in this paper are made available in the open sourceFieldTrip toolbox ( http://www.ru.nl/neuroimaging/
fieldtrip ).
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License whichpermits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproductionin any medium, provided the original author(s) and source arecredited.
References
Abeles, M. (1982). Role of the cortical neuron: Integrator or
coincidence detector? Israel Journal of Medical Sciences, 18 ,8 3 .
Adey, W. R., Walter, D. O., & Hendrix, C. E. (1961). Computer
techniques in correlation and spectral analyses of cerebralslow waves during discriminative behavior. Experimental
Neurology, 3 , 501–524.
Azouz, R., & Gray, C. M. (2003). Adaptive coincidence detection
and dynamic gain control in visual cortical neurons in vivo .
Neuron, 37 , 513–523.
Battaglia, F. P., Benchenane, K., Sirota, A., Pennartz, C. M.,
& Wiener, S. I. (2011). The hippocampus: Hub of brainnetwork communication for memory. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 15 , 310–318.
Benchenane, K., Peyrache, A., Khamassi, M., Tierney, P. L.,
Gioanni, Y., Battaglia, F. P., et al. (2010). Coherent
theta oscillations and reorganization of spike timing in thehippocampal- prefrontal network upon learning. Neuron, 66 ,
921–936.
Benchenane, K., Tiesinga, P. H., & Battaglia, F. P. (2011). Oscil-
lations in the prefrontal cortex: A gateway to memory andattention. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 3 , 475–485.
Besserve, M., Scholkopf, B., Logothetis, N. K., & Panzeri, S.
(2010) Causal relationships between frequency bands of ex-
tracellular signals in visual cortex revealed by an information
theoretic analysis. Journal of Computational Neuroscience,
29, 547–566.
Bichot, N. P., Rossi, A. F., & Desimone, R. (2005). Parallel and
serial neural mechanisms for visual search in macaque areav4.Science, 308 , 529–534.
Börgers, C., & Kopell, N. J. (2008). Gamma oscillations and stim-
ulus selection. Neural Computation, 20 , 383–414.
Bragin, A., Jandó, G., Nádasdy, Z., Hetke, J., Wise, K., &
Buzsáki, G. (1995). Gamma (40–100 hz) oscillation in the
hippocampus of the behaving rat. Journal of Neuroscience,
15, 47–60.
Brown, E. N., Kass, R. E., & Mitra, P. P. (2004). Multiple neural
spike train data analysis: State-of-the-art and future chal-lenges. Nature. Neuroscience, 7 , 456–461.
Buffalo, E. A., Fries, P., Landman, R., Buschman, T. J., &
Desimone, R. (2011). Laminar differences in gamma andalpha coherence in the ventral stream. Proceedings of the Na-tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
108, 11262–11267.
Burchell, T. R., Faulkner, H. J., & Whittington, M. A.
(1998). Gamma frequency oscillations gate temporally coded
afferent inputs in the rat hippocampal slice. Neuroscience
Letters, 255 , 151–154.
Buschman, T. J., & Miller, E. K. (2007). Top-down versus
bottom-up control of attention in the prefrontal and poste-rior parietal cortices. Science, 315 , 1860–1862.
Buzsáki, G. (2010). Neural syntax: Cell assemblies, synapsembles,
and readers. Neuron, 68 , 362–385.
Canolty, R. T., Ganguly, K., Kennerley, S. W., Cadieu, C. F.,
Koepsell, K., Wallis, J. D., et al. (2010). Oscillatory phase
coupling coordinates anatomically dispersed functional cell
assemblies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 107 , 17356–17361.
Cardin, J. A., Carlén, M., Meletis, K., Knoblich, U., Zhang, F.,
Deisseroth, K., et al. (2009). Driving fast-spiking cells in-duces gamma rhythm and controls sensory responses. Na-
ture, 459 , 663–667.
Chalk, M., Herrero, J. L., Gieselmann, M. A., Delicato, L.
S., Gotthardt, S., & Thiele, A. (2010). Attention reduces
stimulus-driven gamma frequency oscillations and spike
field coherence in v1. Neuron, 66 , 114–125.
Colgin, L., Denninger, T., Fyhn, M., Hafting, T., Bonnevie, T.,
Jensen, O., et al. (2009). Frequency of gamma oscillationsroutes flow of information in the hippocampus. Nature, 462 ,
353–357.
Csicsvari, J., Jamieson, B., Wise, K. D., & Buzsaki, G. (2003).
Mechanisms of gamma oscillations in the hippocampus ofthe behaving rat. Neuron, 37
, 311–322.
Denker, M., Roux, S., Linden, H., Diesmann, M., Riehle, A.,
& Grun, S. (2011), The local field potential reflects surplusspike synchrony. Cerebral Cortex . doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr040 .
Destexhe, A., Contreras, D., & Steriade, M. (1999). Spatiotempo-
ral analysis of local field potentials and unit discharges in catcerebral cortex during natural wake and sleep states. Journal
of Neuroscience, 19 , 4595–4608.
Donoghue, J. P., Sanes, J. N., Hatsopoulos, N. G., & Gaal, G.
(1998). Neural discharge and local field potential oscillations
in primate motor cortex during voluntary movements. Jour-
nal of Neurophysiology, 79 , 159–173.
Eeckman, F. H., & Freeman, W. J. (1990). Correlations between
unit firing and eeg in the rat olfactory system. Brain Re-
search, 528 , 238–244.
Fries, P. (2005). A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: Neuronal
communication through neuronal coherence. Trends in Cog-
nitive Science, 9 , 474–480.
Fries, P., Nikoli, D., & Singer, W. (2007). The gamma cycle.
Trends in Neuroscience, 30 , 309–316.
Fries, P., Reynolds, J. H., Rorie, A. E., & Desimone, R. (2001).
Modulation of oscillatory neuronal synchronization by selec-tive visual attention. Science, 291 , 1560–1563.
Fries, P., Roelfsema, P. R., Engel, A. K., König, P., & Singer,
W. (1997). Synchronization of oscillatory responses in visualcortex correlates with perception in interocular rivalry. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the UnitedStates of America, 94 , 12699–12704.
Fries, P., Womelsdorf, T., Oostenveld, R., & Desimone, R.
(2008), The effects of visual stimulation and selective visualattention on rhythmic neuronal synchronization in macaquearea V4. Journal of Neuroscience, 28 , 4823–4835.
Gielen, S., Krupa, M., & Zeitler, M. (2010). Gamma oscillations
as a mechanism for selective information transmission. Bio-
logical Cybernetics, 103 , 151–165.
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 73
Gieselmann, M. A., & Thiele, A. (2008). Comparison of spa-
tial integration and surround suppression characteristics inspiking activity and the local field potential in macaque V1.European Journal of Neuroscience, 28 , 447–459.
Grasse, D., & Moxon, K. (2010). Correcting the bias of spike field
coherence estimators due to a finite ignoreNumber of spikes.Journal of Neurophysiology, 104 , 548–558.
Gray, C. M., König, P., Engel, A. K., & Singer, W. (1989). Oscil-
latory responses in cat visual cortex exhibit inter-columnarsynchronization which reflects global stimulus properties.Nature, 338 , 334–337.
Gregoriou, G. G., Gotts, S. J., Zhou, H., & Desimone, R.
(2009). High-frequency, long-range c oupling between prefron-
tal and visual cortex during attention. Science, 324 , 1207–1210.
Gulyas, A. I., Szabo, G. G., Ulbert, I., Holderith, N., Monyer,
H., Erdelyi, F., et al. (2010). Parvalbumin-containing fast-spiking basket cells generate the field potential oscillationsinduced by cholinergic receptor activation in the hippocam-pus. Journal of Neuroscience, 30 , 15134–15145.
Hansen, B. J., & Dragoi, V. (2011). Adaptation-induced synchro-
nization in laminar cortical circuits. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
108, 10720–10725
Harris, K., Henze, D., Hirase, H., Leinekugel, X., Dragoi, G.,
Czurkó, A., et al. (2002). Spike train dynamics predicts theta-related phase precession in hippocampal pyramidal cells.Nature, 417 , 738–741.
Harvey, C. D., Collman, F., Dombeck, D. A., & Tank, D. W.
(2009). Intracellular dynamics of hippocampal place cellsduring virtual navigation. Nature, 461 , 941–946.
Hasenstaub, A., Shu, Y., Haider, B., Kraushaar, U., Duque, A., &
McCormick, D. A. (2005). Inhibitory postsynaptic potentials
carry synchronized frequency information in active corticalnetworks. Neuron, 47 , 423–435.
Havenith, M. N., Yu, S., Biederlack, J., Chen, N. H., Singer,
W., & Nikolic, D. (2011). Synchrony makes neurons fire insequence, and stimulus properties determine who is ahead.Journal of Neuroscience, 31 , 8570–8584.
Henrie, J., & Shapley, R. (2005). LFP power spectra in V1 cortex:
The graded effect of stimulus contrast. Journal of Neuro-
physiology 94 , 479–490.
Huxter, J. R., Senior, T. J., Allen, K., & Csicsvari, J. (2008). Theta
phase-specific codes for two-dimensional position, trajectoryand heading in the hippocampus. Nature. Neuroscience, 11 ,
587–594.
Jacobs, J., Kahana, M. J., Ekstrom, A. D., & Fried, I. (2007).
Brain oscillations control timing of single-neuron activity inhumans. Journal of Neuroscience, 27 , 3839–3844.
Jarvis, M. R., & Mitra, P. P. (2001). Sampling properties of the
spectrum and coherency of sequences of action potentials.
Neural Computation, 13 , 717–749.
Jensen, O., & Mazaheri, A. (2010). Shaping functional architec-
ture by oscillatory alpha activity: Gating by inhibition. Fron-
tiers in Human Neuroscience, 4 , 186.
Kayser, C., Montemurro, M. A., Logothetis, N. K., & Panzeri, S.
(2009). Spike-phase coding boosts and stabilizes informationcarried by spatial and temporal spike patterns. Neuron, 61 ,
597–608.
Klausberger, T., Magill, P. J., Marton, L. F., Roberts, J. D.,
Cobden, P. M., Buzsaki, G., et al. (2003) Brain-state- andcell-type-specific firing of hippocampal interneurons in vivo .
Nature, 421 , 844–848.
Koepsell, K., Wang, X., Hirsch, J. A., & Sommer, F. T. (2010).
Exploring the function of neural oscillations in early sensorysystems. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 4 , 53.König, P., Engel, A. K., Roelfsema, P. R., & Singer, W. (1995).
How precise is neuronal synchronization? Neural Computa-
tion, 7 , 469–485.
Kopell, N., Whittington, M. A., & Kramer, M. A. (2011). Neu-
ronal assembly dynamics in the beta1 frequency range per-
mits short-term memory. Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108 , 3779–
3784.
L a c h a u x ,J .P . ,R o d r i g u e z ,E . ,M a r t i n e r i e ,J . ,&V a r e l a ,F .J .
(1999). Measuring phase synchrony in brain signals. Human
Brain Mapping, 8 , 194–208.
Lakatos, P., Chen, C. M., O’Connell, M. N., Mills, A., &
Schroeder, C. E. (2007). Neuronal oscillations and multisen-
sory interaction in primary auditory cortex. Neuron, 53 , 279–
292.
Lepage, K. Q., Kramer, M. A., & Eden, U. T. (2011). The depen-
dence of spike field coherence on expected intensity. Neural
Computation, 23 , 2209–2241.
Logothetis, N. K. (2003). The underpinnings of the bold func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging signal. Journal of Neu-
roscience, 23 , 3963–3371.
Maris, E., Schoffelen, J. M., & Fries, P. (2007). Nonparametric
statistical testing of coherence differences. Journal of Neu-
roscience Methods, 163 , 161–175.
Mehta, M. R., Lee, A. K., & Wilson, M. A. (2002). Role of
experience and oscillations in transforming a rate code intoa temporal code. Nature, 417 , 741–746.
Mitchell, J., Sundberg, K., & Reynolds, J. (2007). Differential
attention-dependent response modulation across cell classesin macaque visual area V4. Neuron, 55 , 131–141.
Mitchell, J., Sundberg, K., & Reynolds, J. (2009). Spatial atten-
tion decorrelates intrinsic activity fluctuations in macaque
area V4. Neuron, 63 , 879–888.
Mitra, P., & Bokil, H. (2008). Observed brain dynamics .N e w
York: Oxford University Press.
Mitra, P. P., & Pesaran, B. (1999). Analysis of dynamic brain
imaging data. Biophysical Journal, 76 , 691–708.
Mitzdorf, U. (1985). Current source-density method and applica-
tion in cat cerebral cortex: Investigation of evoked potentialsand EEG phenomena. Physiological Review, 65 , 37–100.
Montemurro, M. A., Rasch, M. J., Murayama, Y., Logothetis, N.
K., & Panzeri, S. (2008). Phase-of-firing coding of naturalvisual stimuli in primary visual cortex. Current Biology, 18 ,
375–380.
Nadasdy, Z. (2010). Binding by asynchrony: The neuronal phase
code. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 4 , 51.
Nakahara, H., Amari, S., & Richmond, B. J. (2006). A com-
parison of descriptive models of a single spike train byinformation-geometric measure. Neural Computation, 18 ,
545–568.
Nolte, G., Bai, O., Wheaton, L., Mari, Z., Vorbach, S., & Hallett,
M. (2004). Identifying true brain interaction from EEG datausing the imaginary part of coherency. Clinical Neurophysi-
ology, 115 , 2292–2307.
Nunez, P. L., & Srinivasan, R. (2006). Electric fields of the brain:
The neurophysics of EEG. New York: Oxford UniversityPress.
O’Keefe, J., & Recce, M. L. (1993). Phase relationship between
hippocampal place units and the EEG theta rhythm. Hip-
pocampus, 3 , 317–330.
Okun, M., & Lampl, I. (2008). Instantaneous correlation of ex-
citation and inhibition during ongoing and sensory-evokedactivities. Nature. Neurosciece, 11 , 535–537.
Okun, M., Naim, A., & Lampl, I. (2010). The subthreshold rela-
tion between cortical local field potential and neuronal firing
74 J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75
unveiled by intracellular recordings in awake rats. Journal of
Neuroscience, 30 , 4440–4448.
Panzeri, S., Brunel, N., Logothetis, N. K., & Kayser, C. (2010).
Sensory neural codes using multiplexed temporal scales.
Trends in Neuroscience, 33 , 111–120.
Pesaran, B., Pezaris, J. S., Sahani, M., Mitra, P. P., & Andersen,
R. A. (2002). Temporal structure in neuronal activity duringworking memory in macaque parietal cortex. Nature. Neuro-
science, 5 , 805–811.
Pesaran, B., Nelson, M. J., & Andersen. R. A. (2008). Free choice
activates a decision circuit between frontal and parietal cor-tex.Nature, 453 , 406–409.
Popescu, A. T., Popa, D., & Pare, D. (2009). Coherent gamma os-
cillations couple the amygdala and striatum during learning.
Nature. Neuroscience, 12 , 801–807.
Ray, S., Hsiao, S. S., Crone, N. E., Franaszczuk, P. J., & Niebur,
E. (2008). Effect of stimulus intensity on the spike-local fieldpotential relationship in the secondary somatosensory cor-tex.Journal of Neuroscience, 28 , 7334–7343.
Ray, S., & Maunsell, J. H. R. (2010). Differences in gamma fre-
quencies across visual cortex restrict their possible use incomputation. Neuron, 67 , 885–896.
Reimer, J., & Hatsopoulos, N. G. (2010). Periodicity and evoked
responses in motor cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 30 ,
11506–11515.
Saalmann, Y. B., Pigarev, I. N., & Vidyasagar, T. R. (2007).
Neural mechanisms of visual attention: How top-downfeedback highlights relevant locations. Science, 316 , 1612–
1615.
Salinas, E., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2001). Correlated neuronal ac-
tivity and the flow of neural information. Nature Review.
Neuroscience, 2 , 539–550.
Schmidt, R., Diba, K., Leibold, C., Schmitz, D., Buzsaki,
G., & Kempter, R. (2009). Single-trial phase precessionin the hippocampus. Journal of Neuroscience, 29 , 13232–
13241.
Shinomoto, S., Kim, H., Shimokawa, T., Matsuno, N., Funahashi,
S., Shima, K., et al. (2009). Relating neuronal firing patternsto functional differentiation of cerebral cortex. PLoS Com-
putational Biology, 5 , e1000433.
Siapas, A. G., Lubenov, E. V., & Wilson, M. A. (2005). Prefrontal
phase locking to hippocampal theta oscillations. Neuron, 46 ,
141–151.
Siegel, M., Warden, M. R., & Miller, E. K. (2009). Phase-
dependent neuronal coding of objects in short-term mem-ory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 106 , 21341–21346.
Sigurdsson, T., Stark, K. L., Karayiorgou, M., Gogos, J. A., &
Gordon, J. A. (2010). Impaired hippocampal-prefrontal syn-
chrony in a genetic mouse model of schizophrenia. Nature,
464, 763–767.
Singer, W. (1999). Neuronal synchrony: a versatile code for the
definition of relations? Neuron, 24 , 49–65.
Sirota, A., Montgomery, S., Fujisawa, S., Isomura, Y., Zugaro,
M., & Buzsáki, G. (2008). Entrainment of neocortical neu-rons and gamma oscillations by the hippocampal thetarhythm. Neuron, 60 , 683–697.
Sohal, V. S., Zhang, F., Yizhar, O., & Deisseroth, K. (2009).
Parvalbumin neurons and gamma rhythms enhance cortical
circuit performance. Nature, 459 , 698–702.
Stam, C. J., Nolte, G., & Daffertshofer, A. (2007). Phase lag in-
dex: Assessment of functional connectivity from multi chan-nel EEG and MEG with diminished bias from common
sources. Human Brain Mapping, 28 , 1178–1193.
Tiesinga, P., & Sejnowski, T. (2010). Mechanisms for phase shift-
ing in cortical networks and their role in communication
through coherence. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4 , 196.
Tort, A. B., Komorowski, R. W., Manns, J. R., Kopell, N. J.,
& Eichenbaum, H. (2009). Theta-gamma coupling increasesduring the learning of item-context associations. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States ofAmerica, 106 , 20942–20947.
Tukker, J. J., Fuentealba, P., Hartwich, K., Somogyi, P., &
Klausberger, T. (2007). Cell type-specific tuning of hip-
pocampal interneuron firing during gamma oscillations in
vivo.Journal of Neuroscience, 27 , 8184–8189.
van der Meer, M. A. A., & Redish, A. D. (2009). Low and
high gamma oscillations in rat ventral striatum have distinctrelationships to behavior, reward, and spiking activity on alearned spatial decision task. FrontIntegrNeurosci, 3 ,9 .
van Wingerden, M., Vinck, M., Lankelma, J., & Pennartz, C.
(2010a). Learning-associated gamma-band phase-locking ofaction-outcome selective neurons in orbitofrontal cortex.Journal of Neuroscience, 30 , 10025–10038.
van Wingerden, M., Vinck, M., Lankelma, J., & Pennartz, C.
(2010b). Theta-band phase-locking of orbitofrontal neu-rons during reward expectancy. Journal of Neuroscience, 30 ,
7078–7087.
VanRullen, R., Guyonneau, R., & Thorpe, S. J. (2005). Spike
times make sense. Trends in Neuroscience, 28 , 1–4.
Varela, F., Lachaux, J. P., Rodriguez, E., & Martinerie, J. (2001).
The brainweb: Phase synchronization and large-scale inte-gration. Nature Review. Neuroscience, 2 , 229–239.
Vinck, M., Lima, B., Womelsdorf, T., Oostenveld, R., Singer, W.,
Neuenschwander, S., et al. (2010a). Gamma-phase shiftingin awake monkey visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 30 ,
1250–1257.
Vinck, M., Oostenveld, R., van Wingerden, M., Battaglia, F., &
Pennartz, C. M. A. (2011). A new improved index of phase-synchronization in the presence of noise, volume-conductionand sample-size bias. NeuroImage, 55 , 1548–1565.
Vinck, M., van Wingerden, M., Womelsdorf, T., Fries, P., &
Pennartz, C. M. A. (2010b). The pairwise phase consistency:
A bias-free measure of rhythmic neuronal synchronization.NeuroImage, 51 , 112–122.
Walter, D. (1963). Spectral analysis for electroencephalograms:
Mathematical determination of neurophysiological relation-ships from records of limited duration. Experimental Neurol-
ogy, 8 , 155–181.
Wang, X. J. (2010). Neurophysiological and computational prin-
ciples of cortical rhythms in cognition. Physiological Review,
90, 1195–1268.
Wehr, M., & Laurent, G. (1996). Odour encoding by temporal
sequences of firing in oscillating neural assemblies. Nature,
384, 162–166.
Womelsdorf, T., Johnston, K., Vinck, M., & Everling, S. (2010a).
Theta-activity in anterior cingulate cortex predicts taskrules and their adjustments following errors. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States ofAmerica, 107 , 5248–5253.
Womelsdorf, T., Schoffelen, J. M., Oostenveld, R., Singer, W.,
Desimone, R., Engel, A. K., et al. (2007). Modulation of neu-ronal interactions through neuronal synchronization. Sci-
ence, 316 , 1609–1612.
J Comput Neurosci (2012) 33:53–75 75
Womelsdorf, T., Vinck, M., Leung, L. S., & Everling, S. (2010b).
Selective theta-synchronization of choice-relevant informa-tion subserves goal-directed behavior. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 4 , 210.
Wulff, P., Ponomarenko, A. A., Bartos, M., Korotkova, T. M.,
Fuchs, E. C., Bahner, F., et al. (2009). Hippocampal thetarhythm and its coupling with gamma oscillations require fastinhibition onto parvalbumin-positive interneurons. Proceed-ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 106 , 3561–3566.
Zanos, T. P., Mineault, P. J., & Pack, C. C. (2011). Removal of
spurious correlations between spikes and local field poten-
tials. Journal of Neurophysiology, 105 , 474–486.
Zeitler, M., Fries, P., & Gielen, S. (2006). Assessing neuronal
coherence with single-unit, multi-unit, and local field poten-tials. Neural Computation, 18 , 2256–2281.
